# BMC Health Services Research



BioMed Central


#### Research article Open Access

## **A heart failure self-management program for patients of all literacy** **levels: A randomized, controlled trial [ISRCTN11535170]**
### Darren A DeWalt* [1], Robert M Malone [1], Mary E Bryant [1], Margaret C Kosnar [1], Kelly E Corr [1], Russell L Rothman [2], Carla A Sueta [3] and Michael P Pignone [1]

Address: [1] Division of General Internal Medicine and Clinical Epidemiology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA, [2] Center for Health Services Research, Division of General Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA and [3] Division
of Cardiology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA


Email: Darren A DeWalt* - dewaltd@med.unc.edu; Robert M Malone - rmalone@med.unc.edu; Mary E Bryant - bbryant@med.unc.edu;
Margaret C Kosnar - margaret_corley@med.unc.edu; Kelly E Corr - kelley_corr@med.unc.edu;
Russell L Rothman - russell.rothman@vanderbilt.edu; Carla A Sueta - paris@med.unc.edu; Michael P Pignone - pignone@med.unc.edu

[* Corresponding author](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16533388)



Published: 13 March 2006


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 doi:10.1186/1472-6963-6-30


This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30



Received: 09 September 2005
Accepted: 13 March 2006



© 2006 DeWalt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
[This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0),](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.


**Abstract**

**Background:** Self-management programs for patients with heart failure can reduce
hospitalizations and mortality. However, no programs have analyzed their usefulness for patients
with low literacy. We compared the efficacy of a heart failure self-management program designed
for patients with low literacy versus usual care.


**Methods:** We performed a 12-month randomized controlled trial. From November 2001 to April
2003, we enrolled participants aged 30–80, who had heart failure and took furosemide.
Intervention patients received education on self-care emphasizing daily weight measurement,
diuretic dose self-adjustment, and symptom recognition and response. Picture-based educational
materials, a digital scale, and scheduled telephone follow-up were provided to reinforce adherence.
Control patients received a generic heart failure brochure and usual care. Primary outcomes were
combined hospitalization or death, and heart failure-related quality of life.


**Results:** 123 patients (64 control, 59 intervention) participated; 41% had inadequate literacy.
Patients in the intervention group had a lower rate of hospitalization or death (crude incidence rate
ratio (IRR) = 0.69; CI 0.4, 1.2; adjusted IRR = 0.53; CI 0.32, 0.89). This difference was larger for
patients with low literacy (IRR = 0.39; CI 0.16, 0.91) than for higher literacy (IRR = 0.56; CI 0.3,
1.04), but the interaction was not statistically significant. At 12 months, more patients in the
intervention group reported monitoring weights daily (79% vs. 29%, p < 0.0001). After adjusting for
baseline demographic and treatment differences, we found no difference in heart failure-related
quality of life at 12 months (difference = -2; CI -5, +9).


**Conclusion:** A primary care-based heart failure self-management program designed for patients
with low literacy reduces the risk of hospitalizations or death.


Page 1 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30



**Background**
Limited literacy skills are common among adults in the
United States [1]. Low literacy is associated with increased
risk of hospitalization and worse control of chronic diseases [1-4]. Heart failure is a common chronic illness
requiring multiple medications and significant self-care.
Heart failure is the leading cause of hospitalization in the
Medicare population [5]. The complexity of care for heart
failure puts people with low literacy at considerable risk
for adverse outcomes including hospitalization, worse
quality of life, and mortality.


Heart failure disease-management interventions appear
effective in reducing rehospitalizations and improving
quality of life [6]. Most randomized clinical trials of heart
failure disease management completed over the last 10
years have enrolled patients during, or shortly after, hospitalization and reported the outcome of readmission [6].
Although the designs of these programs vary, several have
tested education and support to enhance patient selfmanagement as the main component of the intervention

[7-10]. The content of self-management education usually
includes teaching to understand medications, reduce salt
intake, monitor daily weights, and recognize symptoms.
Most programs include structured follow-up either by
home visit, phone, or mail. Only a few, uncontrolled studies specifically ask patients to self-adjust their diuretics

[11,12].


Heart failure self-management programs may be particularly effective for vulnerable populations, such as those
with poor literacy [13,14]. However, to our knowledge,
no previous studies have explicitly examined the role of
self-management programs in a low literacy population. A
recently published study and accompanying editorial suggested that such self-management support may be most
effective among vulnerable populations [13,14]. Low literacy may represent a vulnerability for which we should
design our programs. Disease management for patients
with low literacy may require refined approaches to foster
self-management skills. We developed a heart failure selfmanagement program for use by patients with a variety of
literacy levels [15]. We performed a randomized controlled trial comparing our self-management program to
usual care among outpatients to test if the program could
reduce hospitalizations and improve heart failure-related
quality of life.


**Methods**
_**Study design**_
We conducted a randomized controlled trial in the University of North Carolina (UNC) General Internal Medicine Practice, which serves a wide socioeconomic range of
patients. The practice, staffed by over 20 attending faculty



and 70 medical residents, cares for over 500 patients with
heart failure.


_**Study participants**_
To be eligible, patients had to have a clinical diagnosis of
heart failure confirmed by their primary provider through
a direct interview, and one of the following: 1) chest x-ray
findings consistent with heart failure, 2) ejection fraction
<40% by any method, or 3) a history of peripheral edema.
They also had to have New York Heart Association class IIIV symptoms within the last 3 months. Patients were
excluded if they had moderate to severe dementia (based
on the treating physician's clinical judgment), terminal
illness with life expectancy less than 6 months, severe
hearing impairment, blindness, current substance abuse,
a serum creatinine >4 mg/dl or on dialysis, a requirement
of supplemental oxygen at home, lacked a telephone, or
were scheduled to undergo cardiac surgery or awaiting
heart transplant. We did not exclude patients on the basis
of literacy skill because we felt patients of all literacy levels
would benefit from this intervention. Patients who read
well often prefer information presented in an easy-to-read
format [16]. We accepted referrals from the cardiology
clinic if patients met eligibility criteria. This study was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of the UNC
School of Medicine, and all participants gave informed
consent prior to enrollment. For participants who could
not adequately read the informed consent document, the
research assistant read and explained it to them. They were
asked to sign a short form indicating that the informed
consent document was reviewed and they agreed to participate. When the short form was used, a witness was asked
to attest to the adequacy of the consent process.


_**Procedures**_

Participants were recruited between November 2001 and
April 2003 from the General Internal Medicine and Cardiology Practices at UNC Hospitals. A trained research
assistant screened all patients age 30–80 for use of furosemide. If the patient was on furosemide, their physician
was queried about the presence of heart failure. If the
patient met eligibility criteria and consented to participate, baseline data were collected. We then randomized
patients by concealed allocation based on a random
number generator to receive the intervention or usual
care. All patients were followed for one year. All data were
collected in the General Internal Medicine Practice.


_**Intervention**_

The intervention was delivered in the General Internal

Medicine Practice. The educational materials and disease
management intervention were previously described in
detail, and the intervention is summarized here [15].


Page 2 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30



The intervention began with a 1-hour educational session
with a clinical pharmacist or health educator during a regular clinic visit. Patients were given an educational booklet designed for low literacy patients (written below the 6 [th]
grade level and extensively pre-tested in focus groups and
a pilot study [15]) and a digital scale. The educator and
patient reviewed the booklet together, including management scenarios. As part of the educational session,
patients were taught to identify signs of heart failure exacerbation, perform daily weight assessment, and adjust
their diuretic dose. Because this intervention was aimed at
patients with low literacy, the health educator used pedagogic strategies felt to improve comprehension for
patients with low literacy [17]. For example, the educator
had the patient teach back the information [18], engaged
the patient in filling out the notebook, and used brainstorming to help the patient incorporate self-management
into their lives.


The educator, patient, and primary care physician collaborated to establish the patient's "good weight" (i.e., where
the patient's heart failure was stable) and baseline diuretic
dose. The educator then filled in the management plan in
the patient's notebook to help the patient better manage
weight fluctuations and self-adjust the diuretic dose based
on weight (Figure 1). The general plan involved doubling
the dosage if weight went up and halving it if weight went
down.


The program coordinator then made scheduled follow-up
phone calls (days 3, 7, 14, 21, 28, 56) and monthly during
months 3–6. The follow-up phone calls, each lasting 5–15
minutes, were designed to reinforce the educational session and provide motivation for the patients. Again, the
program coordinator had the patient describe their selfmanagement practices and offered feedback to improve
them. Patients experiencing worsening symptoms were
scheduled acute visits with their physician. We did not
provide specialized nursing assessment, care or medication advice beyond diuretic dosing. If the patient's doctor
determined that the good weight had changed, the program coordinator would revise the care plan with the
patient.


Patients enrolled in the control group received a general
heart failure education pamphlet written at approximately
the 7 [th ] grade level, and continued with usual care from
their primary physician. The only contacts between the
research team and the control patients were at enrollment
and data collection.


_**Measures**_

We assessed outcomes at 6 and 12 months through in-person interviews and review of the medical record. To be
sensitive to low literacy, all interviews were conducted ver


bally by a trained research assistant. If patients were unable to come to clinic for the interview, it was conducted by
phone. The research assistant was not blinded to the
patient's study group.


Primary outcomes were death or all-cause readmission
and heart failure-related quality of life at the end of 12
months. Data on hospitalization dates were obtained
from the patient and confirmed by medical chart review.
All admissions, regardless of hospital or cause, were
counted.


For exploratory analyses, we classified reason for admission as cardiac or non-cardiac. Cardiac admissions
included those primarily for heart failure (e.g., shortness
of breath and edema relieved by diuresis) and other cardiac causes such as chest pain, arrhythmias, or syncope.
Cause of admission was determined by chart review by
one of the authors (D.D.) who was blinded to treatment
allocation.


Heart failure-related quality of life was assessed using a
modified version of the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire (MLHF). The MLHF is a 21 question
instrument with a 6-point Likert scale response option
and scores ranging from 0 to 105 [19]. In pilot testing of
the MLHF, we found that low literacy patients had trouble
answering questions with the standard 6-point Likert scale

[15], so we changed the response scale to 4 points, using
a visual display with stars to represent increasing severity.
The 4-point Likert scale was scored as 0, 1, 3, and 5 to
approximate standard scores on the MLHF.


Secondary measures included heart failure self-efficacy,
knowledge, and behaviors. Self-efficacy was measured
with an 8 item scale developed for the behaviors needed
in this trial as suggested by self-efficacy scale developers

[20]. Respondents used a 4-point Likert scale yielding a
total score from 0–24. We assessed heart failure knowledge using a knowledge test previously developed for this
population [15], Heart failure self-management behavior
was assessed by asking patients how often they weighed
themselves.


We used patient self-report and the medical chart to measure age, gender, race, insurance status, income, years of
education, medication use, years with heart failure, and
the presence of co-morbidities. We measured literacy
using the Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in
Adults (S-TOFHLA) [21], a well-validated scale that correlates well with other measures of reading ability [22].
Patients who scored in the inadequate literacy range on
the S-TOFHLA were considered to have "low literacy." The
cut-point for inadequate literacy is roughly analogous to
the 4 [th ] grade reading level.


Page 3 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30


Sample heart failure management plan for a patient **Figure 1**
Sample heart failure management plan for a patient.



_**Sample size**_
Sample size was based on pilot study results showing a 9point improvement in MLHF scores over 3-months with
the intervention [15]. Detecting a 9-point difference



between intervention and control group with 80% power
and alpha set at 0.05 required 70 patients per group. We
aimed to enroll 150 patients to account for possible attrition, but stopped at 127 because funding ended. We did


Page 4 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30



not power this study to detect differences in hospitalization, but studies with even smaller numbers of patients
have shown a difference for that outcome [7].


_**Statistical methods**_

Patients who did not return any phone calls and did not
return for follow-up assessment did not have outcome
data for analysis. Patients who withdrew from the study
were censored at the time of withdrawal; any data collected prior to withdrawal were included in the analysis.
Baseline differences between groups were assessed using ttests for continuous outcomes and chi-squared tests for
categorical outcomes.


For MLHF, heart failure self-efficacy and heart failure
knowledge, we used two-sample t-tests. Non-parametric
tests were also performed for all comparisons, but results
did not differ from the parametric tests. Because of the
small sample size and the unequal distribution of baseline characteristics, we adjusted for baseline differences
using linear regression. Analyses of self-reported outcomes, such as MLHF, excluded patients who died or
withdrew from the study before 6 or 12 month data was
collected.


For hospitalization or death, we used negative binomial
regression and censored patients at the time of death or
withdrawal from the study. Based on the likelihood ratio
test, negative binomial regression was a better fit for the
data than a Poisson regression. Additionally, the Vuong
test confirmed that a zero-inflated model was inappropriate [23].


Because of uneven distribution of baseline characteristics,
we performed analysis of covariance with negative binomial regression to control for baseline differences [24].
We identified the following variables that could contribute to hospitalization or death based on previous studies:
age, race, gender, literacy level, hypertension, diabetes,
creatinine, MLHF score, use of β-blockers, angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), use of digoxin, and presence of systolic dysfunction [7,25]. Variables were not included in the
model if the relationship between the variable and the
study group or outcome had a p value greater than 0.3. We
started with a model including the following items to
arrive at the best point estimate: age, gender, hypertension, creatinine, MLHF, use of β-blockers, and use of ACE
inhibitors or ARBs. We then eliminated variables from the
model if p > 0.30, and if the point estimate remained
within 10% of the initial estimate.


We prespecified a subgroup analysis in patients with low
literacy to analyze if the intervention had a similar effect.
The same analysis described above was repeated for the



*Patients were not eligible for the following reasons: physician refused (61), terminal illness
(47), not actually on furosemide (38), chronic lung disease (37), NYHA class I (35), age, nonEnglish speaking, no phone, inability to safely self-weigh, body weight too heavy for scale,
dementia, substance abuse and not regularly followed at the clinic.


Screening and enrollment results **Figure 2**
Screening and enrollment results.


Page 5 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_



subgroups of patients with low literacy and those with
higher literacy. The initial multivariate model for the subgroups analysis included: age, gender, hypertension,
MLHF, use of β-blockers, and use of ACE inhibitors or
ARBs.


_**Role of the funding source**_
The funding sources had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; or preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript.


**Results**

_**Patients**_

We screened 919 patients on furosemide between November 2001 and April 2003. 127 met eligibility criteria and
agreed to participate (Figure 2). Of those not enrolled,
407 did not have heart failure according to their physician, 367 did not meet eligibility criteria and 27 declined
to participate.


Of those randomized to the control group, 1 never
returned after the first visit, 1 withdrew during the study
and 4 died during the study. Follow-up was completed for
all of the remaining participants (98%) (Figure 3). Of
those randomized to the intervention group, 3 never
returned after the first visit, 4 withdrew during the study
and 3 died during the study. Follow-up was completed for
all of the remaining participants (93%).
















_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30



























Patient flow during the study **Figure 3**
Patient flow during the study.


At baseline, most characteristics were similar between the
two groups (Table 1). However, the control group had
more participants with hypertension, fewer with diabetes,
and fewer men. Of heart failure related characteristics, the
control group had more participants with systolic dysfunction, and taking β-blockers. The intervention group
had more participants taking ACE inhibitors or ARBs, and
digoxin. Regardless of these differences, none were statistically significant. The control group did have statistically
significantly higher baseline MLHF scores representing
worse symptoms at baseline.


_**Hospitalization or death**_
There were 68 hospitalizations (65) or deaths (3) in the
intervention group and 111 (107 hospitalizations, 4
deaths) in the control group. The crude all-cause hospital
admission or death incidence rate ratio (IRR) was 0.69
(95% CI 0.40, 1.19). After adjusting for age, gender, use of
ACE inhibitor or ARB, use of a β-blocker, presence of
hypertension, and baseline MLHF, intervention patients
were less likely to have the outcome (IRR = 0.53; 95% CI
0.32, 0.89). 61% of patients in the control group had at
least one hospitalization or died, and 42% of patients in
the intervention group had at least 1 hospitalization or
died (p = 0.13).



_**Cardiac hospitalization**_
39% of patients in the control group and 34% of patients
in the intervention group had at least one hospitalization
for cardiac causes (p = 0.55). The unadjusted IRR was 0.79
(95% CI 0.42, 1.5). After adjusting for baseline differences, the IRR was 0.85 (95% CI 0.44, 1.7).


_**Heart failure-related quality of life**_
In unadjusted analysis, the control group, on average,
improved 5 points on the MLHF and the intervention
group improved by 1 point. The difference was not statistically significant (3.5 points, 95% CI 11, -4, p = 0.36).
After adjusting for baseline differences between the
groups, the difference was 2 points (95% CI 9, -5, p =
0.59) suggesting no effect on heart failure-related quality
of life.


_**Other outcomes**_

_Knowledge_
Heart failure related knowledge improved more in the
intervention group than in the control group. Mean difference in score improvement was 12 percentage points
(95% CI 6, 18; p < 0.001).


_Self-efficacy_
Heart failure self-efficacy improved more in the intervention group than in the control group. Mean difference in
score improvement was 2 points (95% CI 0.7, 3.1; p =
0.0026).


_Self-care behavior_
Significantly more patients in the intervention group than
in the control group reported daily weight measurement
at 12 months (79% vs. 29%, p < 0.001).


_**Subgroup analyses according to literacy**_
Twenty-four patients in each group had inadequate literacy based on the S-TOFHLA (Table 2). Among these
patients, there was no difference in quality of life score in
unadjusted and adjusted analyses (difference = -1.6; 95%
CI -15, 12); p = 0.81). For the combined outcome of hospitalization or death, the unadjusted IRR was 0.77 (95%
CI 0.30, 1.94). After adjusting for baseline differences, the
IRR was 0.39 (95% CI 0.16, 0.91).


Seventy-five patients had marginal or adequate literacy
based on the S-TOFHLA. We found no difference in quality of life score in unadjusted and adjusted analyses (difference = -4.2; 95% CI -14, 6; p = 0.40). Among patients
in the higher literacy group, the unadjusted IRR for hospitalization or death was 0.65 (95% CI 0.33, 1.3). After
adjusting for baseline differences, the IRR was 0.56 (95%
CI 0.30, 1.04). We did not find a statistically significant
effect modification between literacy and the intervention.


Page 6 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30


**Table 1: Baseline characteristics.**

|Variable|Control(n=64)|Intervention(n=59)|Pvalue|
|---|---|---|---|
|Mean Age, years (SD)|62 (11)|63 (9)|0.37|
|African American, %|55|54|0.96|
|Male, %|41|58|0.059|
|Education, years (SD)|9.9 (2.6)|9.1 (3.2)|0.17|
|Income <15,000/yr, %|67|69|0.60|
|Medicaid, %|33|34|0.90|
|Medicare, %|72|71|0.61|
|Inadequate Literacy, %|39|42|0.43|
|Hypertension, %|89|86|0.66|
|Diabetes, %|52|59|0.39|
|Creatinine, mg/dl|1.3|1.2|0.19|
|Time with heart failure, mean|7 (8)|6 (9)|0.75|
|years (SD)||||
|NYHA class, %|||0.66|
|II|47|53||
|III|51|40||
|IV|2|7||
|Systolic dysfunction, %|44|39|0.73|
|Medications, %||||
|ACEI or ARB|69|78|0.25|
|β-blocker|72|54|0.04|
|Digoxin|19|25|0.39|
|Knowledge, mean percent|57|55|0.67|
|Self-efficacy, mean score|22|22|0.64|
|Daily weight measurement, %|15|13|0.64|
|HFQOL score, mean score (range|57|45|0.0028|
|0–105)||||



NYHA: New York Heart Association; ACEI: Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitor; HFQOL: Heart Failure-Related Quality of Life



**Discussion**
A heart failure self-management program designed for
patients with low literacy reduced the rate of the combined endpoint of hospitalization or death. The prespecified subgroup analyses suggest that patients with low
literacy benefited as much from the intervention as the
patients with higher literacy. The success of our intervention reflects the goals of our program. We designed an
easy-to-read and use educational booklet and self-management plan, and focused on overcoming barriers to
learning self-management [15].


Our intervention was founded on teaching self-management. We focused on helping patients understand signs
and symptoms of worsening heart failure and perform
self-adjustment of diuretics based on weight fluctuation.
Many care providers would not attempt to teach patients,
particularly those with low literacy, how to self-adjust
their diuretic medication. We found that, with careful
teaching, many patients incorporated this strategy into
their daily routine successfully, as demonstrated by
improved self-care behaviors. Teaching self-adjustment of
diuretics, rather than the conventional teaching to call the
care provider if weight fluctuates, empowers patients to
take more control over their illness.



Self-adjustment of diuretic dose is a prominent aspect of
the self-management training we provided to the intervention patients. Other programs to improve patient selfmanagement have not been explicit in teaching patients
to self-adjust their diuretic dose based on weight fluctuation. Although our outcomes are comparable to others',
using this approach puts more control into the hands of
the patient. Furthermore, our intervention appears effective among patients with low literacy skills, a group often
overlooked for empowering interventions.


Our study adds to the growing literature on disease management programs for patients with heart failure [6], particularly those that focus on self-management training [710]. Studies focusing on self-management training have
demonstrated comparable improvements in hospitalization rates to more comprehensive programs that aim to
improve the quality of pharmaceutical prescribing, provide home visits, and take place in specialized cardiology
clinics [6]. Such comprehensive programs have also been
shown to reduce mortality, but self-management programs have not [6].


We did not detect any difference in heart failure related
quality of life which was the outcome we powered our


Page 7 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30


**Table 2: Baseline characteristics for the subgroup with low literacy.**

|Variable|Control(n=24)|Intervention(n=24)|Pvalue|
|---|---|---|---|
|Mean Age, years (SD)|65 (10)|68 (8)|0.38|
|African American, %|71|71|1.0|
|Male, %|46|71|0.079|
|Education, years (SD)|8.6 (2.9)|6.3 (2.9)|0.009|
|Income <15,000/yr, %|83|88|0.33|
|Medicaid, %|45|45|1.0|
|Medicare, %|75|79|0.73|
|Inadequate Literacy, %|39|42|0.43|
|Hypertension, %|92|83|0.38|
|Diabetes, %|63|71|0.54|
|Creatinine, mg/dl|1.4|1.3|0.43|
|Time with heart failure, mean years (SD)|7 (7)|8 (11)|0.63|
|NYHA class, %|||0.55|
|II|58|50||
|III|42|46||
|IV|0|4||
|Systolic dysfunction, %|38|42|0.55|
|Medications, %||||
|ACEI or ARB, %|83|79|0.14|
|b-blocker, %|71|42|0.04|
|Digoxin, %|17|21|0.39|
|Knowledge, mean percent|46|49|0.40|
|Self-efficacy, mean score|21|21|0.78|
|Daily weight measurement, %|17|4|0.16|
|HFQOL score, mean score (range 0–105)|51.9|42|0.11|



NYHA: New York Heart Association; ACEI: Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitor; HFQOL: Heart Failure-Related Quality of Life



study to detect. Other self-management studies that have
found improved quality of life have enrolled patients during a heart failure hospitalization [8,9]; however, we
enrolled patients in the outpatient setting while they were
clinically stable. Improving quality of life for stable outpatients may be more difficult for this type of intervention.


We have previously reported that patients with diabetes
and low literacy benefited more from a disease management intervention than those with higher literacy skills

[26]. A similar result in two different chronic diseases substantiates the claim that appropriately designed disease
management programs may have greater effect for low literacy or vulnerable populations, who are most at risk for
adverse outcomes with usual care.


This finding is particularly important in light of the recent
study by DeBusk and colleagues that did not find a reduction in hospitalization with a well-designed comprehensive intervention [13]. The authors and an accompanying
editorial [14] suggested that the failure to detect improvement may have occurred because the patients studied
were less at-risk than in other studies. They called for more
research to determine better ways of targeting disease



management. We believe that low literacy is an important
marker for vulnerability to adverse outcomes, and that
disease management programs targeted to patients with
low literacy may be an effective way of focusing resources
on those most able to benefit. If patients with low literacy
are to be preferentially recruited for such programs, innovative outreach and screening efforts will likely be
required, as patients with low literacy may face particular
barriers to accessing such care.


This study should be interpreted in light of its limitations.
Research assistants were not blind to group assignment
during the assessment of self-reported outcomes. As such,
patients in the intervention may have been more likely to
inflate their responses in an effort to please the interviewer. This effect would tend to inflate patient responses
to the subjective assessments of heart failure-related quality of life, self-efficacy, and self-care behaviors. The MLHF
questionnaire was modified from its original form to
make it easier for patients with low literacy to respond.
This change in the scale may have changed its ability to
detect important changes in heart failure related quality of
life. Because the groups' mean scores were almost identical, we do not feel this limitation changed our results. In


Page 8 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30



a similar vein, most questionnaires are not validated in
low literacy populations, raising questions as to their ability to perform to the same standards.


Our sample size was small, which did not allow for an
even distribution of baseline variables among the groups.
We controlled for baseline differences between groups in
our analysis. While it is controversial whether or not to
control for baseline differences in randomized controlled
trials, some analysts have argued that doing so improves
the power without introducing bias [24]. A larger, multisite study would offer better control of confounders, better generalizability, and more power to determine differences in effect according to literacy.


We did not collect data on the resources needed to implement this type of intervention in usual settings, and such
a study and cost-effectiveness analysis would be helpful
for most interventions of this type. We used health educators, not nurses or physicians, to deliver the intervention.
By using less highly trained individuals to deliver the
intervention, we enabled nurses and physicians to perform clinical tasks more commensurate with their training. Other studies that have performed global cost
estimates have found that the savings from reductions in
hospitalizations exceed the cost of the intervention [6].


**Conclusion**
In conclusion, our heart failure self-management program, designed for patients of all literacy levels, appears to
reduce rates of hospitalization and death. Patients with
low literacy, and other vulnerable patients, may stand to
benefit most from these programs. Further research into
the design, implementation, and dissemination of disease
management programs for low literacy patients will be
crucial for meeting the health care needs of the growing
population of patients with chronic illness.


**Competing interests**
Drs. DeWalt and Pignone have received honoraria and
grants from Pfizer, Inc., Dr. Rothman has received grants
from Pfizer, Inc., and Dr. Sueta is in their speakers bureau.


**Authors' contributions**
DD conceived of the study, participated in its design and
coordination, performed statistical analyses, interpretation of the data, and drafted the manuscript. RM, MB conceived of the study and participated in its coordination.
MK, KC coordinated the study, and collected the data, RR,
CS participated in study design and interpretation of the
data. MP conceived of the study, participated in its design
and coordination, and interpretation of the data. All
authors reviewed the manuscript for important intellectual content and gave final approval.



**Acknowledgements**
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of our health educators,
Clayne Felix, MPH, Cathy Rawls, MPH, and Nikki Rogers, who helped to
deliver the intervention. This study was funded by grants from the Pfizer
Health Literacy Initiative, the Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program, the University of North Carolina Program on Health Outcomes, and
grant no. P30NR03962 from the National Institute of Nursing Research,
NIH, to the Center for Research on Chronic Illness at the University of

North Carolina.


**References**

1. Kirsch I, Jungeblut A, Jenkins L, Kolstat A: **Adult Literacy in Amer-**
**ica: A First Look at the Findings of the National Adult Liter-**
**acy Survey. 3rd Edition.** Washington, DC, National Center for
Education, US Department of Education; 2002:201.
2. DeWalt DA, Berkman ND, Sheridan SL, Lohr KN, Pignone M: **[Liter-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15610334)**
**[acy and health outcomes: a systematic review of the litera-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15610334)**
**ture.** _Journal of General Internal Medicine_ 2004, **19:** 1228-1239.
3. Baker DW, Gazmararian JA, Williams MV, Scott T, Parker RM, Green
D, Ren J, Peel J: **[Functional health literacy and the risk of hos-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12144984)**
**[pital admission among medicare managed care enrollees.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12144984)**
_Am J Public Health_ 2002, **92(8):** 1278-1283.
4. Baker DW, Parker RM, Williams MV, Clark WS: **[Health literacy](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9844076)**
**[and the risk of hospital admission.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9844076)** _J Gen Intern Med_ 1998,
**13(12):** 791-798.
5. Haldeman GA, Croft JB, Giles WH, Rashidee A: **[Hospitalization of](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9924171)**
**[patients with heart failure: National Hospital Discharge Sur-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9924171)**
**[vey, 1985 to 1995.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9924171)** _Am Heart J_ 1999, **137(2):** 352-360.
6. McAlister FA, Stewart S, Ferrua S, McMurray JJ: **[Multidisciplinary](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15312864)**
**strategies for the management of heart failure patients at**
**high risk for admission A systematic review of randomized**
**[trials.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15312864)** _J Am Coll Cardiol_ 2004, **44(4):** 810-819.
7. Krumholz HM, Amatruda J, Smith GL, Mattera JA, Roumanis SA, Radford MJ, Crombie P, Vaccarino V: **[Randomized trial of an educa-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11755291)**
**[tion and support intervention to prevent readmission of](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11755291)**
**[patients with heart failure.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11755291)** _J Am Coll Cardiol_ 2002, **39(1):** 83-89.
8. Serxner S, Miyaji M, Jeffords J: **Congestive heart failure disease**
**management study: a patient education intervention.** _Con-_
_gest Heart Fail_ 1998, **4:** 23-28.
9. [Harrison MB, Browne GB, Roberts J, Tugwell P, Gafni A, Graham ID:](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12021683)
**Quality of life of individuals with heart failure: a randomized**
**trial of the effectiveness of two models of hospital-to-home**
**[transition.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12021683)** _Med Care_ 2002, **40(4):** 271-282.
10. Jaarsma T, Halfens R, Huijer Abu-Saad H, Dracup K, Gorgels T, van
Ree J, Stappers J: **[Effects of education and support on self-care](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10208788)**
**[and resource utilization in patients with heart failure.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10208788)** _Eur_
_Heart J_ 1999, **20(9):** 673-682.
11. Fonarow GC, Stevenson LW, Walden JA, Livingston NA, Steimle AE,
Hamilton MA, Moriguchi J, Tillisch JH, Woo MA: **[Impact of a com-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9283532)**
**prehensive heart failure management program on hospital**
**readmission and functional status of patients with advanced**
**[heart failure.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9283532)** _J Am Coll Cardiol_ 1997, **30(3):** 725-732.
12. Smith LE, Fabbri SA, Pai R, Ferry D, Heywood JT: **[Symptomatic](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9383589)**
**[improvement and reduced hospitalization for patients](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9383589)**
**[attending a cardiomyopathy clinic.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9383589)** _Clin Cardiol_ 1997,
**20(11):** 949-954.
13. DeBusk RF, Miller NH, Parker KM, Bandura A, Kraemer HC, Cher
DJ, West JA, Fowler MB, Greenwald G: **[Care management for](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15492340)**
**[low-risk patients with heart failure: a randomized, control-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15492340)**
**[led trial.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15492340)** _Ann Intern Med_ 2004, **141(8):** 606-613.
14. Wagner EH: **[Deconstructing heart failure disease manage-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15492346)**
**[ment.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15492346)** _Ann Intern Med_ 2004, **141(8):** 644-646.
15. DeWalt DA, Pignone M, Malone R, Rawls C, Kosnar MC, George G,
Bryant B, Rothman RL, Angel B: **[Development and pilot testing](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15476993)**
**[of a disease management program for low literacy patients](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15476993)**
**[with heart failure.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15476993)** _Patient Educ Couns_ 2004, **55(1):** 78-86.
16. Davis TC, Crouch MA, Wills G, Miller S, Abdehou DM: **[The gap](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=2230677)**
**[between patient reading comprehension and the readability](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=2230677)**
**[of patient education materials.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=2230677)** _J Fam Pract_ 1990, **31(5):** 533-538.
17. Doak CC, Doak LG, Root JH: **Teaching patients with low liter-**
**acy skills.** 2nd edition. Philadelphia, J. B. LIppincott; 1996.
18. Schillinger D, Piette J, Grumbach K, Wang F, Wilson C, Daher C,
Leong-Grotz K, Castro C, Bindman AB: **[Closing the loop: physi-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12523921)**


Page 9 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2006, **6** :30 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/6/30


**[cian communication with diabetic patients who have low](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12523921)**
**[health literacy.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12523921)** _Arch Intern Med_ 2003, **163(1):** 83-90.
19. Rector TS, Kubo SH, Cohn JN: **Patients' self-assessment of their**
**congestive heart failure.** _Heart Failure_ 1987, **Oct/Nov:** 198-209.
20. DeVellis RF, DeVellis BM: **Self-Efficacy and Health.** _Handbook of_
_Health Psychology_ 2001:235-247.
21. [Baker DW, Williams MV, Parker RM, Gazmararian JA, Nurss J:](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14528569)
**[Development of a brief test to measure functional health lit-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14528569)**
**[eracy.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14528569)** _Patient Educ Couns_ 1999, **38:** 33-42.
22. Nurss JR, Parker RM, Williams MV, Baker DW: **Test of Functional**
**Health Literacy in Adults Technical Report.** Atlanta, Georgia
State University; 1998:19.
23. Vuong QH: **Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and non-**
**nested hypotheses.** _Econometrica_ 1989, **57:** 307-334.
24. Hernandez AV, Steyerberg EW, Habbema JD: **[Covariate adjust-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15196615)**
**ment in randomized controlled trials with dichotomous out-**
**comes increases statistical power and reduces sample size**
**[requirements.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15196615)** _J Clin Epidemiol_ 2004, **57(5):** 454-460.
25. Krumholz HM, Parent EM, Tu N, Vaccarino V, Wang Y, Radford MJ,
Hennen J: **[Readmission after hospitalization for congestive](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8996046)**
**[heart failure among Medicare beneficiaries.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8996046)** _Arch Intern Med_
1997, **157(1):** 99-104.
26. Rothman R, DeWalt DA, Malone R, Bryant B, Shintani A, Crigler B,
Weinberger M, Pignone M: **[The influence of patient literacy on](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15479936)**
**[the effectiveness of a primary-care based diabetes disease](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15479936)**
**[management program.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15479936)** _JAMA_ 2004, **292(14):** 1711-1716.


**Pre-publication history**
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here:


                          http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472 6963/6/30/prepub









Page 10 of 10


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


