## PL [o] S CLINICAL TRIALS

# The Effects on Saturated Fat Purchases of Providing Internet Shoppers with Purchase- Specific Dietary Advice: A Randomised Trial

Amy Huang [1], Federica Barzi [1], Rachel Huxley [1], Gareth Denyer [2], Beth Rohrlach [2], Kathy Jayne [1], Bruce Neal [1*]


1 George Institute for International Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, 2 Department of Biochemistry, University of


Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia



Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov:
NCT00352508


Funding: The National Heart
Foundation of Australia and the
Future Forum provided personal and
project support for this study via
competitive funding applications
awarded as scholarship, fellowship,
and project support. It is of note that
ShopFast played no role in the
design, analysis, or interpretation of
the data and did not participate in
the preparation of this report.


Competing Interests: The authors
declare that no competing interests
exist.


Citation: Huang A, Barzi F, Huxley R,
Denyer G, Rohrlach B, et al. (2006)
The effects on saturated fat
purchases of providing Internet
shoppers with purchase-specific
dietary advice: A randomised trial.
PLoS Clin Trials 1(5): e22. DOI: 10.
1371/journal.pctr.0010022


Received: March 27, 2006
Accepted: July 18, 2006
Published: September 22, 2006


DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022


Copyright: � 2006 Huang et al. This
is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative

Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original
author and source are credited.


- To whom correspondence should
be addressed. E-mail: bneal@george.

org.au


#### ABSTRACT

............................................................................................................................................


Objectives: The supermarket industry now services many customers through online food
shopping over the Internet. The Internet shopping process offers a novel opportunity for the
modification of dietary patterns. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects on
consumers’ purchases of saturated fat of a fully automated computerised system that provided
real-time advice tailored to the consumers’ specific purchases recommending foods lower in
saturated fat.


Design: This study was a blinded, randomised controlled trial.


Setting: The study was conducted in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.


Participants: The participants were consumers using a commercial online Internet shopping
site between February and June 2004.


Interventions: Individuals assigned to intervention received fully automated advice that
recommended specific switches from selected products higher in saturated fat to alternate
similar products lower in saturated fat. Participants assigned to control received general nonspecific advice about how to eat a diet lower in saturated fat.


Outcome Measures: The outcome measure was the difference in saturated fat (grams per
100 g of food) in shopping baskets between the intervention and control groups.


Results: There were 497 randomised participants, mean age 40 y, each shopping for an
average of about three people. The amount of saturated fat in the foods purchased by the
intervention group was 0.66% lower (95% confidence interval 0.48–0.84, p, 0.001) than in the
control group. The effects of the intervention were sustained over consecutive shopping
episodes, and there was no difference in the average cost of the food bought by each group.


Conclusions: Fully automated, purchase-specific dietary advice offered to customers during
Internet shopping can bring about changes in food purchasing habits that are likely to have
significant public health implications. Because implementation is simple to initiate and
maintain, this strategy would likely be highly cost-effective.

. [.........................................................................................................................................................................................................]



www.plosclinicaltrials.org 0001 September | 2006 | e22


Editorial Commentary


Background: Current evidence from randomized trials and observational
studies indicates that people in the developed world should try to lower
their intake of saturated fat, in order to reduce the risk of cardiovascular
diseases such as heart attacks and strokes. However, achieving this aim
in the population is not straightforward, partly because of the high cost
of personalized interventions and, often, their limited success. One
possible way of delivering dietary advice that might help people to make
healthier food choices is through Internet shopping systems. In the trial
reported here, which was carried out in Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia, people using an Internet food shopping system and who were
about to complete their purchases were offered the chance to
participate in the trial. If they agreed, participants were immediately
randomized to receive either general dietary advice (the trial’s control) or
tailored advice delivered by a computer program that prompted
shoppers to replace specific items in their shopping basket with
alternatives lower in saturated fat. The main outcome the trial

researchers were interested in was the percent of saturated fat in the
food bought, compared between the two arms of the trial. The
researchers also looked at the cost per gram of the food that was
bought.


What this trial shows: The researchers recruited 456 participants into
the trial. They found that the participants who received tailored advice
bought foods containing less saturated fat, on average, than the
participants who received only general advice. The difference between
the two groups amounted to around 10% of the average quantity of
saturated fat in food chosen before the advice was offered, and this
difference was statistically significant. Finally, there was no significant
difference in the average cost of food between the two arms of the trial.


Strengths and limitations: The trial recruited enough participants to
evaluate whether this intervention had an effect on the main outcomes,
and the randomization procedures used and outcomes measured were
appropriate. A potential strength of this study is that it evaluates a lowcost technology that might be useful alongside other strategies for
reducing saturated fat intake. However, the trial was conducted among
people who are technically aware, and may not therefore represent the
general population as a whole. In the trial, the outcomes measured were
limited to information about the foods bought, and the effects on
cardiovascular risk or health outcomes were not examined.


Contribution to the evidence: Systematic reviews of existing randomized trials already show that offering dietary advice can bring about
improvements in diet (such as saturated fat intake) and cardiovascular
risk. This trial adds to that evidence by showing that tailored advice such
as can be delivered via an Internet shopping system is likely to be a
useful method of encouraging healthier food purchases.


The Editorial Commentary is written by PLoS staff, based on the reports of the
academic editors and peer reviewers.


INTRODUCTION


Fats consumed in food are an important cause of dyslipidaemia and cardiovascular disease [1–3]. There is clear evidence
from randomised controlled trials that significant improvements in blood lipid parameters can be achieved by
modifying dietary fat intake [4], and for some time there
has been a consensus that reduced consumption of saturated
fat should be a goal for the populations of many higherincome countries [5,6]. A broad range of strategies for the
modification of dietary fat consumption have been designed
and implemented with varying degrees of success [7–10]. Key
factors for efficacy of dietary interventions appear to be the
intensity of advice offered and the tailoring of suggestions to
individual’s specific purchases [11–13]. Unfortunately, the



Dietary Intervention and Internet Shopping


high cost associated with providing such advice has precluded
the widespread implementation of some of the most effective

programs.
Over the last decade many supermarkets have introduced
online food purchasing facilities. The computer interface
offers a unique new opportunity to deliver automated,
purchase-specific dietary advice to large numbers of individuals at low cost [14–16]. We report here the results of a
randomised trial designed to determine whether the provision of such advice could result in reductions in the amount

of saturated fat in foods purchased by consumers using a
commercial Internet shopping facility.


METHODS


The Dietary Intervention in e-Shopping Trial was a blinded,
randomised controlled trial conducted in collaboration with

an established supermarket providing an Internet shopping
service in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. The software
program was developed in conjunction with Simbient
Solutions (North Sydney, New South Wales, Australia).
Recruitment and follow-up was done between February and
June 2004. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee
of the University of Sydney, and all participants provided
informed consent online.


Participants
All customers of the online supermarket service that made
any purchase after the trial commencement date (February
2004) were offered the opportunity to participate until
recruitment was closed (April 2004). Recruitment was via an
online electronic pop-up message. The opportunity to
participate was offered after the selection of items for
purchase had been completed, just prior to online checkout.
Interested participants were first asked to read an online
participant information sheet and then to complete an online
consent form. Once this was done, a simple baseline data
collection form comprising questions about basic demographics, shopping habits, and selected medical conditions
was provided for completion. The entire trial enrolment
process was estimated to take only 5–10 min.


Interventions

A comprehensive list of all food products purchased online
listed in order of frequency of purchase was obtained from
the commercial partner operating the Internet shopping
service. In total, 383 commonly purchased food items that
contained 1% or more saturated fat (range 1% to 92%) were
selected, and a suitable lower-fat alternate was identified for
each. There were 524 discrete foods identified in this process.
Food items that were not prepackaged, such as some meat
products, were excluded from our study since reliable
information about saturated fat content was not easily
available.

Intervention. Participants assigned to intervention received advice tailored to the food items they had selected
for purchase (Figure S1). This was done automatically by a
computer program that compared the food items selected for
purchase against the list of identified items containing 1 g or
more of saturated fat per 100 g of food. For each such item
that was identified the participant was presented with the
opportunity to either retain it or to swap it for the alternate



www.plosclinicaltrials.org 0002 September | 2006 | e22


lower in saturated fat. A simple side-by-side on-screen
presentation of the original item and the suggested alternate
was used. Once the participants had made their decisions,
they were returned to the usual online checkout process.
Control. Participants assigned to control received general
non-specific advice about how to choose a diet lower in
saturated fat (Figure S2). This advice was presented in the
form of a static Web page and was based on information
provided on the Web site of the National Heart Foundation
of Australia. Once participants had read the advice they were
prompted to make any changes to their planned purchases on
the basis of the information they had read and then returned
to the usual online checkout process.


Objectives
The objective of the study was to determine whether the
provision of fully automated and purchase-specific dietary
advice could produce reductions in the amount of saturated
fat in foods purchased by consumers using a commercial
Internet shopping facility.


Outcomes

The primary outcome was the mean percent of saturated fat
in the purchased items that were among the 524 foods
studied. The secondary outcome was the mean cost per 100 g
of these same items. Participants were offered the same form
of advice each time that they used the online supermarket
during the 5-mo recruitment and follow-up period (February
to June 2004). On each occasion after the first they could
choose either to receive the advice or simply to proceed
straight to the online checkout. On every occasion the
contents of the online shopping basket were recorded before
and after the advice (or the opportunity to receive the advice)
was offered.


Sample Size
A sample size of 500 participants was selected to provide at
least 90% power with a ¼ 0.05 to detect a 2% or greater
difference in the mean saturated fat content (in grams per
100 g of food) of purchased foods between randomised
groups. The power calculation was based on assumptions
derived from a 1986 trial with broadly similar goals that used
an in-store computer terminal [17].


Randomisation and Blinding
Once the recruitment process was completed, participants
were assigned to intervention or control at random by a
central computerised process with minimisation by age, sex,
and number of individuals the food was being purchased for.
Randomisation was done in real time as each participant was
recruited using a computer program designed and tested by
statisticians at the George Institute for International Health
in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Once randomised
participants were immediately provided with the form of
advice consistent with their randomised assignment. The
participants were unaware of treatment allocation, and the
principal investigator performed unblinding of the treatment
allocation once the study follow-up had ended.


Statistical Methods

The content of saturated fat in each shopping basket
(separately for the shopping baskets before and after advice
was provided) was calculated for each participant by dividing



Dietary Intervention and Internet Shopping


the sum in grams of all the saturated fat by the sum in grams
of all the food, for the 524 foods studied. Primary analyses
were based on the first shopping episode for each individual
that included one of the 524 foods in either a ‘‘before advice’’
or ‘‘after advice’’ shopping basket. For the 41 (8%) individuals
that never purchased one of the 524 foods, the saturated fat
content before and after was imputed using the method of
multiple imputation [18]. The difference in mean saturated
fat content of the ‘‘after’’ compared to the ‘‘before’’ shopping
baskets was calculated separately for intervention and control
and compared between groups using linear regression
models. The linear regression models included the amount
of saturated fat selected prior to advice being offered, since
there was by chance a small imbalance in this value between
the randomised groups (control 5.9%, intervention 7.1%)

[19]. An arcsine square-root transformation of the saturated
fat content (in grams per 100 g of food) was used since the
data were skewed, with the results transformed back after
analysis. A series of sensitivity analyses were done to test the
stability of the main result: the effect estimate was first
recalculated excluding participants with missing values for
the primary outcome, and then recalculated with these
participants included but having the change in saturated fat
set as zero. Second, the results were calculated without
adjustment for saturated fat, and separate linear regression
models were fitted with adjustment for a series of possible
confounders including age, gender, body mass index, and a
variable indicating whether the participant usually tried to
buy low-fat food before being recruited on the trial.
Subgroup analyses were also done to explore the constancy
of the intervention across the participant population by
including in the linear models a randomised group by
covariate interaction term. The effects of repeated presentation of the advice were determined by using linear mixed
effects models [20]. All the statistical analyses were done using
SAS/STAT version 8.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina,
United States).


RESULTS

Participants
A total of 4,548 individuals were offered participation, and
497 were randomised (251 intervention and 246 control)
(Figure 1). Of these, 456 (224 intervention and 232 control)
completed at least one episode of shopping that included one
or more of the 524 foods studied. Median follow-up time
completed by the end of the study in June 2004 was 35 d, and
the median number of shopping episodes done by participants was three (range 1–20). The baseline characteristics
documented on the questionnaire were balanced between
randomised groups, with a mean participant age of 40 y and a
proportion female of 88% (Table 1).


Outcomes and Estimation

For the first occasion on which advice was offered, the
amount of saturated fat in the food purchased by the
intervention group after advice was a mean of 0.66% (0.48–
0.84, p, 0.001) lower than in the corresponding foods
purchased by the control group (Table 2), which is equivalent
to an approximate 10% reduction in saturated fat content of
foods purchased (Figure 2). This difference resulted from a
decrease in the mean saturated fat content in the foods



www.plosclinicaltrials.org 0003 September | 2006 | e22


Figure 1. Flow Chart of Study


DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022.g001


purchased following the advice offered to the intervention
group of 0.77% (0.60–0.94, p, 0.001), with no corresponding
decrease in the control group 0.04% (0.00–0.08, p ¼ 0.07). The
effect estimate for the primary outcome was 0.62% (0.46–
0.79, p, 0.001) if analysis was restricted to only the 456
individuals that selected one of the 524 foods studied and was
0.58 (0.39–0.77, p, 0.001) if the change in saturated fat was
set to zero for those individuals that did not select one of the

foods. The subgroup analyses provided some evidence that
the intervention had greater effects among individuals with
higher body mass index and among people above 40 y of age
(for both, homogeneity p, 0.03) (Table 3). There was no
baseline variable that substantively altered the main result as
a consequence of its inclusion or exclusion as a covariate.
A secondary outcome of the study was to assess the impact
of the intervention on the cost of foods purchased online.
The mean cost per 100 g of the foods purchased by the
intervention group was not different from that in the control
group (intervention AUD$0.63 [0.58–0.68]/100 g versus con


Dietary Intervention and Internet Shopping


¼
trol AUD$0.62 [0.58–0.67]/100 g, p 0.19). The foods higher in
saturated fat that were most commonly present in the
shopping basket prior to advice being offered but absent
after the advice had been offered were higher-fat dairy
products. Lower-fat dairy products were the items most
frequently added to the shopping basket after advice was
provided.


Ancillary Analyses
The effects of the intervention over repeated episodes of
shopping were explored amongst the 115 participants that
completed six shopping episodes during the study. These
analyses demonstrated that for the intervention group the
magnitude of the reduction in saturated fat achieved was
greater in earlier compared to later shopping episodes (for
trend, p ¼ 0.01) (Figure 2) and showed that there was no effect
of the control condition on saturated fat during any shopping
episode (p . 0.09 for all six shopping episodes in the control
group).



www.plosclinicaltrials.org 0004 September | 2006 | e22


Table 1. Baseline Characteristics


.......................................................................................

|Characteristica|Intervention Control|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||Group|Group|
||(n ¼ 251)|(n ¼ 246)|
|Age (y), mean (SD)|39 (10)|41 (10)|
|Female|86 (2)|89 (2)|
|Married|80 (3)|80 (3)|
|Ethnicity Caucasian/European|90 (2)|83 (2)|
|Body mass index, kg/m2 (SD)|26 (8)|27 (7)|
|University education|63 (3)|62 (3)|
|Employed|82 (2)|80 (3)|
|Household income (AUD$), mean (SD)b|105,774|112,698|
||(73,866)|(73,920)|
|Cigarette smoker|13 (2)|12 (2)|
|Blood cholesterol ever checked|70 (3)|71 (3)|
|Using cholesterol-lowering drugs|6 (1)|7 (2)|
|Usually try to buy low-fat products|64 (3)|72 (3)|
|Percent of food bought online|49 (3)|51 (3)|
|Median number of people buying|3 (1–12)|3 (1–12)|
|for, n (range)|||



aData more than 98% complete and presented as proportions (standard error) unless
otherwise indicated.
bData about 50% complete.
AUD$, Australian dollars; SD, standard deviation.



Table 1. Baseline Characteristics



.......................................................................................







Dietary Intervention and Internet Shopping


Figure 2. Effects of Repeated Advice in the Intervention (n ¼ 115) and
Control Group (n ¼ 121)


Squares are placed at the point estimate of the effect observed in the
intervention (A) and control (B) groups, and the vertical lines extend to the
95% confidence intervals around the estimate. The p-value for trend in the
intervention group indicates a progressive decrease in effect size with
repeated shopping episodes. There was no significant decrease in saturated
fat at any time point in the control group, nor any trend over time (all p . 0.09).
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022.g002


both systematic and random errors were minimised and that
the study findings are both reliable and precise. As only about
one in ten of the consumers that accessed the Internet

shopping service during the study period actually participated in the trial, the study participants are clearly not a





DISCUSSION

Interpretation
This study clearly demonstrates that it is possible to
significantly influence consumers’ Internet shopping habits
with a simple automated computer algorithm that provides
advice tailored to planned food purchases at the point of sale.
Changes in saturated fat purchasing habits of the type
achieved in this trial are likely to produce long-term
reductions in cardiovascular disease mediated through favourable changes to blood lipid profiles [4,9]. Furthermore, the
computer algorithm was designed and implemented at a total
cost of just a few tens of thousands of dollars and required little
maintenance during the 5-mo study period. While periodic
updating of the lists of products defined as high in saturated
fat and their alternates would be required if implementation
were longer term, the resource implications would be small.
With anticipated growth in online shopping in Australia [21]
and other developed countries, the type of approach proven
here could be a cost-effective, long-term, non-drug strategy for
the prevention of cardiovascular disease.


Generalisability
The Dietary Intervention in e-Shopping Trial was a large
randomised controlled trial, which should have ensured that



Table 2. Effects of Intervention on Primary Outcome

|Group|n|DecreaseinPercentSaturated|p-Value within|DecreaseinPercentSaturated|p-Value between|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Fat after Advice, % (95% CI)|Treatment Group|Fat in Intervention versus|Treatment Groups|
|||||Control, % (95% CI)||
|Control|251|0.04 (0.00–0.08)|0.07|0.66 (0.48–0.84)|,0.001|
|Intervention|246|0.77 (0.60–0.94)|,0.001|||



The primary outcome was the mean percent of saturated fat in the purchased items that were one of the 524 foods studied.
CI, confidence interval.
. [..........................................] DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022.t002



Table 2. Effects of Intervention on Primary Outcome



.......................................................................................................................................................................................









www.plosclinicaltrials.org 0005 September | 2006 | e22


Dietary Intervention and Internet Shopping



Table 3.

|Characteristic|Subgroup|n|MagnitudeofGreaterDecreasein|p-Value for Difference|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||Percent Saturated Fat in Intervention|between Subgroups|
||||versus Control, % (95% CI)||
|Sex|Women|436|0.64 (0.45–0.82)|0.44|
||Men|61|0.84 (0.30–1.39)||
|Age|,40 y|280|0.47 (0.27–0.66)|0.03|
||40 y|217|0.95 (0.64–1.25)||
|University education|Yes|181|0.79 (0.49–1.08)|0.21|
||No|312|0.61 (0.39–0.82)||
|Employed|Yes|91|0.72 (0.37–1.07)|0.64|
||No|406|0.65 (0.45–0.85)||
|Cigarette smoker|No|436|0.68 (0.50–0.86)|0.51|
||Yes|61|0.56 (0.06–1.06)||
|Blood cholesterol ever checked|No|151|0.66 (0.32–1.01)|0.99|
||Yes|346|0.66 (0.46–0.85)||
|Using cholesterol-lowering therapy|No|470|0.61 (0.44–0.78)|0.15|
||Yes|27|1.63 (0.33–2.93)||
|Body mass index|,25|261|0.47 (0.28–0.67)|0.02|
||25|233|0.85 (0.57–1.12)||
|Income|Below AUD$90,000a|161|0.65 (0.36–0.94)|0.53|
||Above AUD$90,000|178|0.55 (0.26–0.85)||
|Usually try to buy low fat|No|160|0.89 (0.47–1.30)|0.41|
||Yes|337|0.59 (0.40–0.78)||
|Married|No|100|0.95 (0.48–1.42)|0.08|
||Yes|393|0.59 (0.41–0.77)||



aAUD$90,000 is the median income level in New South Wales, Australia.
CI, confidence interval.



Table 3. Effects of Intervention on Primary Outcome in Main Participant Subgroups



.......................................................................................................................................................................................









representative sample of the general population and may not
even be representative of those that do Internet shopping.
However, the analyses presented here demonstrate that the
intervention was similarly effective in most of the subgroups
studied, suggesting that the tool is potentially beneficial to a
broad range of individuals that utilise Internet shopping
services. Furthermore, significantly greater uptake might be
expected in other circumstances. Specifically, in a non-trial
setting, consumers would not be required to read a lengthy
participant information sheet, enter personal details on an
online consent form, or complete a baseline questionnaire. In
conjunction with marketing activities suitable for a health
promotion campaign but inappropriate for a research
project, these changes would likely greatly increase the
proportion of individuals making use of the service.


Overall Evidence

The absolute cardiovascular risk of most of our study
participants would have been low, and the immediate effects
of this intervention on cardiovascular events would be

limited. However, if a longer-term view is taken it is clear
that the potential of this strategy is substantial. First,
participants using the system appeared able to learn to select
foods, particularly dairy items, that were lower in saturated
fat after receiving advice on just one occasion; retention was
probably aided by the fact that computer shopping programs
store prior shopping lists for future use. The high fat content
of dairy items, such as full-fat milk and cheese, combined with
a wide range of lower-fat substitutes that are currently
available, would partly explain why these food items were
particularly popular switch-over items with consumers in this
current study. By contrast, in the Women’s Health Initiative
trial [22], reduction in fat intake primarily came from



changes in meats and desserts. We postulate that this
difference is likely due to the fact that items such as milk
and cheese are more likely to be purchased using the Internet
shopping facility, whereas more expensive food items, such as
meat and desserts, are purchased using more conventional
means. The lesser effect of the intervention in later shopping
episodes may have been because from the second shopping
episode onwards the intervention group appeared to have
learned to select foods with a lower percentage of saturated
fat before receiving the advice. Second, the decisions to select
items lower in saturated fat influenced shopping purchases
not just for the index case but also for an average of two other
individuals that the index case was shopping for. Third, half
of all the food purchased by the participants for their
household was exposed to review by our system. Fourth, while
the apparently greater effects of the intervention among
those with higher body mass index and older age could be
chance findings, these results may also indicate that the
intervention is of particular use among a group that is at
increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Finally, changing
dietary patterns of the currently young and healthy should
translate into substantial long-term benefits with increasing
age [7].
The tool we developed specifically targeted purchases of
saturated fat. It is easy to imagine an adaptation of the system
that could provide advice about salt intake or more
sophisticated versions able to address multiple nutritional
determinants of health simultaneously and provide broader
‘‘heart healthy’’ dietary advice. However, as Internet supermarket shopping currently accounts for only a small
proportion of all groceries consumed, such a system should
be used in conjunction with more conventional methods for
delivering dietary advice. It is also possible to conceive of



www.plosclinicaltrials.org 0006 September | 2006 | e22


interfaces able to provide advice to consumers with specific
disease states such as diabetes, high blood pressure, or high
cholesterol. With the concept of automated consumertailored computer advice now of proven benefit in a
commercial setting, the challenge will be to see the results
translated into practice. This will require imaginative
approaches developed in collaboration with public health
advocacy groups, regulatory bodies, and the food retail
industry.


........................................................................................


SUPPORTING INFORMATION


CONSORT Checklist
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022.sd001 (50 KB DOC).


Trial Protocol
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022.sd002 (309 KB DOC).


Figure S1. Screenshot for the Intervention Group
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022.sg001 (58 KB DOC).


Figure S2. Screenshot for the Control Group
Found at DOI: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010022.sg002 (155 KB DOC).


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The authors thank the commercial partner ShopFast and their
customers for their participation in this project.


Author Contributions

AH, RH, BR, and BN designed the study. AH, FB, and BN analyzed the
data. GD designed the study-specific analysis tools, supervised coding
of food products, and consulted over aspects of the study design. BR
provided nutrition advice that contributed to the design of the study.
KJ helped to design the Web-based software that was used in the study
and also to transfer the data to the database for analysis. AH, FB, RH,
and BN contributed to the writing of the paper.


REFERENCES


1. Hu F, Stampfer M, Manson J, Rimm E, Colditz G (1997) Dietary fat intake
and the risk of coronary heart disease in women. N Engl J Med 337: 1491–
1499.

2. Bilenko N, Fraser D, Vardi H, Shai I, Shahar D (2005) Mediterranean diet
and cardiovascular diseases in an Israeli population. Prev Med 40: 299–305.
3. Laaksonen D, Nyyssonen K, Niskanen L, Rissanen T, Salonen J (2005)



Dietary Intervention and Internet Shopping


Prediction of cardiovascular mortality in middle-aged men by dietary and
serum linoleic and polyunsaturated fatty acids. Arch Intern Med 165: 193–
199.
4. Clarke R, Frost C, Collins R, Appleby P, Peto R (1997) Dietary lipids and
blood cholesterol: Quantitative meta-analysis of metabolic ward studies.
BMJ 314: 112–117.
5. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (1995) Report of the Dietary
Guidelines Advisory Committee on the dietary guidelines for Americans,
1995. Washington (D. C.): US Department of Agriculture. Available: http://
www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/Dietary/dgreport.pdf. Accessed 17 August 2006.
6. Krauss R, Eckel RH, Howard B, Appel LJ, Daniels SR, et al. (2000) AHA
dietary guidelines: Revision 2000: A statement for healthcare professionals
from the Nutrition Committee of the American Heart Association.

Circulation 102: 2284–2299.
7. Tang J, Armitage J, Lancaster T, Silagy C, Fowler G, et al. (1998) Systematic
review of dietary intervention trials to lower blood total cholesterol on
free-living subjects. BMJ 316: 1213–1220.
8. Brunner E, White I, Thorogood M, Bristow A, Curle D, et al. (1997) Can
dietary interventions change diet and cardiovascular risk factors? A metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Public Health 87: 1415–1422.
9. Hooper L, Summerbell C, Higgins J, Thompson R, Capps N, et al. (2001)
Dietary fat intake and prevention of cardiovascular disease: Systematic
review. BMJ 322: 757–763.
10. Puska P (1992) The North Karelia Project: Nearly 20 years of successful
prevention of CVD in Finland. Hygie 11: 33–35.
11. De Bourdeaudhuij I, Brug J (2000) Tailoring dietary feedback to reduce fat
intake: An intervention at the family level. Health Educ Res 2000: 449–462.
12. Campbell M, DeVellis B, Strecher V, Ammerman A, DeVellis R, et al. (1994)
Improving dietary behavior: The effectiveness of tailored messages in
primary care settings. Am J Public Health 84: 783–787.
13. Windhauser M, Evans M, McCullough M, Swain JF, Lin PH, et al. (1999)
Dietary adherence in the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension trial.
DASH Collaborative Research Group. J Am Diet Assoc 99: S76–S83.
14. Tate DF, Wing RR, Winett RA (2001) Using Internet technology to deliver a
behavioral weight loss program. JAMA 285: 1172–1177.
15. Tate D, Wing R, Jackvony E (2003) Effect of internet behavioral counseling
on weight loss in adults at risk for type 2 diabetes. JAMA 289: 1833–1836.
16. Oenema A, Brug J, Lechner L (2001) Web-based tailored nutrition
education: Results of a randomized controlled trial. Health Educ Res
2001: 647–660.
17. Winett RA, Moore JF, Wagner JL, Hite LA, Leahy, et al. (1991) Altering
shoppers’ supermarket purchases to fit nutritional guidelines: An interactive information system. J Appl Behav Anal 24: 95–105.
18. Schafer J (1997) Analysis of incomplete multivariate data. London:
Chapman and Hall. 448 p.
19. Woodward M (1999) Epidemiology: Study design and data analysis. London:
Chapman and Hall. 728 p.
20. Verbeke G, Molenberghs G (2000) Linear mixed models for longitudinal
data. New York: Springer. 568 p.
21. Australian Bureau of Statistics (2000) Use of the Internet by householders.
Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics. Available: http://www.ausstats.abs.
gov.au/ausstats/subscriber.nsf/0/AA81B5CB7B3A7E98CA2569F4007E7763/
$File/81470_nov%202000.pdf. Accessed 17 August 2006.
22. Patterson RE, Kristal A, Rodabough R, Caan B, Lillington L, et al. (2003)
Changes in food sources of dietary fat in response to an intensive low-fat
dietary intervention: Early results from the Women’s Health Initiative. J Am
Diet Assoc 103: 454–460.



www.plosclinicaltrials.org 0007 September | 2006 | e22


