# BMC Health Services Research



BioMed Central


#### Research article Open Access

## **Disease knowledge after an educational program in patients with** **GERD – a randomized controlled trial**
### Jorgen Urnes* [1,2], Hermod Petersen [1,3] and Per G Farup [4]

Address: [1] Department of Community Medicine and General Practice, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway,
2Department of Occupational Health, Trondheim University Hospital, Norway, 3Trondheim University Hospital Abdominal Centre, Norway and
4Unit for Applied Clinical Research, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway


Email: Jorgen Urnes* - Jorgen.Urnes@ntnu.no; Hermod Petersen - Hermod.Petersen@ntnu.no; Per G Farup - Per.Farup@ntnu.no

- Corresponding author



Published: 13 November 2008


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-236


[This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236)



Received: 5 April 2008
Accepted: 13 November 2008



© 2008 Urnes et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
[This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0),](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.


**Abstract**

**Background:** Patient education has proved beneficial in several but not all chronic disease.
Inconsistent findings may rely on varying educational effects of various programs and differential
effects on subgroups of patients. Patients' increase in disease knowledge may serve as a feedback
to the educator on how well the education program works – but may not be associated to relevant
clinical outcomes like quality of life (QoL). This study aimed to investigate the effects of a group
based education program for patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) on disease
knowledge and the association between knowledge and QoL.


**Methods:** Patients with GERD were randomly allocated to education (102 patients) or control
(109 patients). The education program was designed as a structured dialogue conveying
information about pathophysiology, pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment of GERD,
patients' rights and use of healthcare. Outcomes were a 24 item knowledge test on GERD (score
0 – 24) 2 and 12 months after the educational program and disease specific and general QoL
(Digestive symptoms and disease impact, DSIQ, and General Health Questionnaire, GHQ).


**Results:** Patients allocated to education achieved higher knowledge test scores than controls at 2
months (17.0 vs. 13.1, p < 0.001) and at 12 months (17.1 vs. 14.0, p < 0.001) follow-up. Knowledge
test score was positively associated with having completed advanced school and inversely related
to psychiatric illness and poor QoL as perceived by the patients at the time of inclusion. Overall,
changes in knowledge test score were not associated with change in QoL.


**Conclusion:** A group based education program for patients with GERD designed as a structured
dialogue increased patients' disease knowledge, which was retained after 1 year. Changes in GERDknowledge were not associated with change in QoL.


**Trial registration:** ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT0061850



**Background**
Patient education has proved beneficial in several but not
all chronic disease [1-8]. In a patient education program



on gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD-education) we
found improvement in quality of life (QoL) in patients
with primary school only, while patients who had com

Page 1 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236



pleted advanced school experienced no effect [9]. These
inconsistencies may rely on varying educational effects of
various methods and contents, as well as on differential
effects on subgroups of patients.


Patient education exerts its effect through patient "learning". Only a few studies have been performed to evaluate
the effect of patient education on patient learning and the
relationship between patient learning and quality of life

[10-13]. Learning may relate to knowledge, skills and attitude [14-17]. Knowledge is an easy and readily available
proxy measure of learning and may serve as feedback to
the educator on how well the education program performs.


In order to improve patient education programs it is necessary to understand what contents and methods are most
suitable with regard to patient learning and how this
learning relates to relevant clinical endpoints. In this article we report the effect of a dialogue based patient education program on GERD-related knowledge in patients
with mild GERD compared to what is achieved in routine
care. Secondary to this, we report how increase in GERDrelated knowledge was associated with improvement in
QoL, and if this relationship was different in patients with
primary school only and those who had completed
advanced school.


**Methods**

_**Patients**_

The study population was patients with mild GERD, living in the vicinity of the hospital, who were to be followed
up by their general practitioner after having been to
ambulatory gastroscopy. Inclusion criteria were symptoms dominated by heartburn and/or acid regurgitation,
to be in need of symptom relief at least 5 days per week
when the symptoms were at their worst during the last
year, to have a disease history of at least three months, to
be between 20 and 75 years and able to give an informed
consent to participate. As patients with present or previous esophagitis grade II or more (Savary-Miller classification) tend to be followed up by gastroenterologists at the
hospital, they were excluded. Other exclusion criteria were
peptic ulcer disease, established continuous need of proton pump inhibitors or NSAIDs, or a wish for surgical
treatment. Earlier surgical treatment in the proximal GItract, having another disease affecting quality of life, pregnancy, alcoholism or drug abuse or not being competent
to participate in an educational program also excluded
patients from participation.


_**Patient characteristics and questionnaires**_
Socio-demographic data, disease characteristics and history, and QoL were recorded in a structured inclusion
interview before randomisation. Formal education was



recorded as having completed primary school only and
having completed advanced school (more than 10 years
formal education). Prior to the study patients' response to
H2-blocker (ranitidine) was tested and they were characterised as _ranitidine responders_ or not.


Quality of life was recorded by the _General Health Ques-_
_tionnaire, 30 item version (GHQ-30)_ [18] and the _Digestive_
_Symptoms and Impact Questionnaire, DSIQ_ [19]. GHQ-30
has 5 subscales: Anxiety, Well-being, Depression, Social
dysfunction and Coping. DSIQ has 5 subscales: Reflux,
Gastric dysfunction, Pain and bowel symptoms, Health
impairment and Life impairment. Both questionnaires
were scored on likert scales where low scores indicate better QoL. GHQ-30 likert sum-score (GHQ-lss) was the sum
of all item scores. DSIQ sum-score (DSIQ-ss) was the
mean of all item scores.


At 2 and 12 months follow-up data corresponding to
baseline were collected by postal questionnaires and telephone interviews by research assistants, in addition to the
GERD knowledge test.


_The GERD-knowledge test_ consisted of 24 statements
regarding GERD (appendix). The patients classified the
statements as "true" or "false" or declared "don't know".
A panel of non-medical and medical staff at our institute
tested its comprehensibility. The correct classifications of
the statements as "true" or "false" were confirmed by gastroenterologists at the hospital abdominal centre. GERDknowledge test score (GERD-knowledge) was the sum of
correct responses giving a score range from 0 – 24.


_**Randomisation**_
Randomisation was performed in blocks according to
scheduled teaching sessions. After being included, the
patients were asked whether the dates of the next session
suited them. If they answered "yes", they would draw a
ticket allocating them to either GERD-education or control groups. If "no" the procedure would be postponed
until a scheduled time was found suitable. The allocations
to either GERD-education or control groups, maximum 8
patients in each group, would go on until either all allocations were filled, or until the teaching session started.


_**GERD – education**_
A GERD – education program was developed for the purpose of this investigation by the main researcher (JU) and
reviewed by a specialist in gastroenterology (HP) and a
general practitioner, the latter two both holding senior
academic positions. The program was conducted in
groups to take advantage of group dynamics, stimulate
each patient to participate in discussions and dialogue,
and to lower the costs per patient as compared to individual consultations. The program was structured as three les

Page 2 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236



sons that took place in the evenings spaced over two
weeks. Each lesson lasted two hours. The content and
structure of the program was explained on the first lesson.
The first lesson conveyed basic information about GERD
symptoms and pathophysiology, the second about pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment and the
third lesson about use of health services, communication
and patients' rights. The essences of the previous lessons
were repeated on the second and third lessons. The education program was designed as a structured dialogue allowing the patients to comment, ask questions and relate
their own experiences to the information given on overhead transparencies. The patients were encouraged to disclose and discuss their worries, experiences and ideas in
the group. All patients in the education group were given
copies of the transparencies. Patients who did not attend
all lessons were given an oral presentation of the information they missed either by telephone or by an extra class.
The program was led by a medical doctor trained in educational counselling (JU) and was tested in a pilot study.
After having attended the program, the GERD-education
group was to be followed up by their general practitioner
as part of routine care in the same manner as the control

group.


_**Statistical analysis**_
Patients who responded to both knowledge tests and
questionnaires in the follow-up were classified as completing the study per protocol. In addition, patients in the
education group were required to have attended at least
one lesson to be classified as completing per protocol.
Analyses were conducted on an intention-to-treat basis
with serial mean imputation of missing items and results
are reported as such. In addition per protocol analyses
were performed but showed no significantly different
results and are not reported.


Differences in GERD-knowledge were tested using student's t-test for independent or related groups as appropri
ate.


Associations between GERD-knowledge and socio-demographic variables, disease history, disease characteristics,
DSIQ-ss and GHQ-lss at baseline were analysed in bivariate correlations. Variables correlating at a statistical level
of p < 0.20 were selected as independent variables for
stepwise multiple linear regression analysis with GERDknowledge as the dependent variable.


Finally, the association between GERD-knowledge change
from 2 to 12 months, and change in DSIQ and GHQ-30
profile and sum scores (QoL variables) were analysed in
multiple linear regression models adjusting for selected
covariates. Potential covariates were first identified by correlating baseline variables with change in GERD-knowl


edge. Baseline variables correlating with p < 0.20 were
entered as independent variables in stepwise multiple
regression analysis with change in GERD-knowledge as
dependent variable. Baseline variables remaining in the
model with p < 0.05 were entered as covariates in the final
adjusted regression models. The final adjusted regression
models were thus established using change in GERDknowledge as the dependent variable, and using change in
the QoL variables as independent variables adjusting for
the selected covariates. Separate analyses were performed
for all patients, patients having completed primary school
only and patients having completed advanced school.
These separate analyses were also performed stratified by
allocation (GERD-education and controls).


Correlations were performed by parametric and non-parametric analyses as appropriate.


Statistical significance was set to p < 0.05. SPSS ver. 14.00
was used for all calculations.


Based on a small pilot study a sample size of 200 patients
was found to be obtainable within a reasonable time
span, and was considered to be an adequate number for
analysis.


_**Ethics**_
The study was conducted according to the Declaration of
Helsinki, and approved by the Regional Committee for
Medical Ethics in Trondheim, and the Data Inspectorate
Norway. Each patient was informed about the study and
gave a written consent to participation.


**Results**

_**Patients**_
Of 211 patients who were included, 102 were randomly
allocated to GERD education and 109 to control. The
GERD -education and control groups did not differ statistically with regards to socio-demographic variables; disease history or disease characteristics (Table 1). Of the
patients who were allocated to GERD -education, 58
(56.9%) attended three lessons, 27 (26.5%) two and 5
(4.9%) one lesson. Twelve patients (11.8%) did not meet
at all, of whom 5 were not able due to work or private
obligations, 4 gave no reasons, 2 on grounds of other diseases and 1 did not wish to participate. At two months follow-up 90 patients (88%) in the GERD -education group
and 100 patients (92%) in the control group responded
completely. At 12 months 85 (83%) and 88 patients
(81%) gave complete responses respectively.


_**GERD-knowledge test**_
Figure 1 shows mean GERD-knowledge at 2 and 12
months. The GERD -education group scored at both times
higher than the control group (p < 0.001). The controls


Page 3 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236


**Table 1: Socio-demographic and disease characteristics of patients allocated to GERD-education vs. control groups, recorded at**
**baseline.**

|Col1|Education(n=102)|Control(n=109)|
|---|---|---|
|Age, years|47 (12)|47 (14)|
|Sex (female)|49%|50%|
|Primary school only|31%|34%|
|Cohabitating|77%|80%|
|Blue-collar worker|22%|22%|
|BMI (kg/m2)|26 (3.6)|26 (4.7)|
|Previous history of serious disease|14%|17%|
|Length of GERD history (months)|166 (151)|169 (154)|
|Esophagitis|60%|51%|
|Having used H2-blocker or PPI|72%|63%|
|Ranitidine responder|41% (n = 74)|47% (n = 71)|
|Somatic comorbidity|53%|54%|
|Psychiatric comorbidity|8%|10%|



Continuous variables are means (SD), categorical variables are percentages.



increased their knowledge test score significantly from 2
to 12 months follow-up (p < 0.001), whereas the GERDeducated patients did not. The difference in GERD-knowledge change between the patient education group and
controls was 0.9 (p = 0.01).


GERD-knowledge correlated at a significance level of p <
0.2 with 8 socio-demographic variables, disease history or
disease characteristic variables and GHQ-lss at baseline in
addition to random allocation. Multiple linear regression
analysis rendered GERD -education, having completed
advanced school, a lower GHQ-lss and absence of psychiatric illness at baseline as independently associated with
higher knowledge test scores. The highest beta-value and
explained variance (R [2] ) was found for allocation to
GERD-education both at 2 and 12 months (Table 2). The
length of GERD history showed no significant association
to GERD-knowledge.


Allocation to GERD-education, a higher number of days
on sick leave at the time of inclusion, and previously serious disease at baseline correlated negatively to an increase
in GERD-knowledge from 2 to 12 months (p < 0.20),
while total duration of GERD correlated positively. Varia


bles selected in the stepwise regression analysis and
entered in the final adjusted regression models were
number of days on sick leave at the time of inclusion and
allocation to intervention.


There was no statistically significant association between
change in QoL variables and change in GERD-knowledge
for the whole group of patients. An association was found
between an increase in GERD-knowledge and deterioration in sense of coping (GHQ-30 profile: Coping failure)
for patients who had completed advanced school (Table
3). For patients with primary school only, associations in
the same direction were found in the DSIQ scales Gastric
dysfunction, Life impairment and sum score, and an
increase in GERD-knowledge test score. The explained
variances in the final regression models (R [2] ) were 0.1 or
less. We found no major differences in these results when
analyses were performed separately for the GERD-education and the control group.


**Discussion**
Patients with mild GERD to be followed up by their general practitioner after having been to gastroscopy, who
attended a dialogue and group-based education program


Page 4 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236


_Change edu: 0 (ns, p = 0.60)_


##### 20 15 10 5






##### 0

Edu Contr Edu Contr

2 m o n t h s 1 2 m o n t h s


Knowledge test scores at 2 and 12 months follow-up for educated patients (edu) and patients allocated to control (contr) **Figure 1**
**Knowledge test scores at 2 and 12 months follow-up for educated patients (edu) and patients allocated to con-**
**trol (contr).** Plots show median (--), mean (- -), interquartile range (box) and 10th/90th (whiskers) percentiles. Diff. = difference in means.



increased their disease knowledge as compared to GERDpatients in routine care, and their knowledge was retained
for 12 months.


Recommending lifestyle changes to GERD patients has
been considered beneficial [20,21]. However, few studies
have evaluated the effect of systematic, structured patient
education and to our knowledge there are no randomised
controlled trials like ours relating patient education, disease knowledge and quality of life in patients with GERD.


In our study the strongest relationship was found between
GERD-knowledge and being allocated to the GERD-education program. However, knowledge might be also be



influenced by disease characteristics and socio-demographic variables [12,22]. We found that self reported
presence of psychiatric disease and poor QoL as shown by
GHQ-lss at baseline inversely correlated to GERD-knowledge. GHQ-30 is sensitive to depressive states and anxiety
and may actually recognise poor mental health which is
not recognised by the patient as such. The patients in our
study would not be expected to be seriously impaired by
psychiatric disease as the inclusion criteria ruled out
patients who had other diseases than GERD that affected
quality of life. Our findings suggest that even barely recognisable, minor reductions in mental health are associated
with reduced learning which eventually may affect clinical
outcomes. Although not surprising, our findings do


Page 5 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236


**Table 2: Multiple linear regression analysis of knowledge test scores at 2 and 12 months follow-up as dependent variables and**
**independent variables at baseline which correlated with knowledge test score at p < 0.2**

|Col1|Col2|2months|Col4|Col5|12months|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_Independent variable1_|**_Beta_**|**_p_**|**_R2 change_**|**_Beta_**|**_p_**|**_R2 change_**|
|Allocation to education group|3.6|_< 0.001_|0.29|2.7|_< 0.001_|_0.17_|
|Formal educational level|1.1|_< 0.001_|0.06|1.2|_< 0.001_|_0.07_|
|GHQ-score at time of inclusion|- 0.1|_< 0.001_|0.08|- 0.2|_< 0.001_|_0.12_|
|Psychiatric disease at time of inclusion|- 1.6|_0.01_|0.02|- 1.5|_0.02_|_0.02_|
|R2 (adjusted) for the model|0.44|||0.36|||



1 Variables excluded in both models: Previous history of serious disease, esophagitis, having used PPI or H2-blocker, DSIQ sum-score, global QoL.



remind us that we must attend to patients' depressive
moods also in GERD-education.


In "Patient Education – A Practical Approach" [23], Kate
Lorig underlines the necessity of analysing what patients
want and need when planning an education program, tailoring the program as patient groups change. Our study
shows, not unexpectedly, that patients who have completed advanced school have a higher level of knowledge
irrespective of allocation to education or control group.
This may have several explanations: Firstly these patients
may be more used to acquiring knowledge in general
through information seeking and may also better understand the language of their doctor than those with less
education. Secondly, our knowledge-test may simply
favour patients who are used to such testing. Our findings
thus support the need for tailoring patient education programs to the qualifications and premises of the partici
pants.


There was a contradictory finding in our study: Although
patients in the control group significantly increased their
knowledge over one year, the length of GERD history did
not predict knowledge test score. It is reasonable to



explain the increase in GERD-knowledge of the control
group with time by the learning effects of filling in the test
and the learning motivation precipitated by participating
in the study.


The presumption that increased GERD-knowledge in
some way lead to an improved quality of life, e.g. through
reinforcing the reassuring effect of gastroscopy [24] was
not supported by our data – neither when analysed overall
nor when stratified by allocation. The explained variance
in the final regression models were small (R [2 ] < 0.1) and
we suspect the few associations we found between
increase in GERD-knowledge and change in quality of life
to be spurious. We believe this indicates that the positive
effect of patient education on QoL in patients with primary school only [9] is not mediated through increasing
their level of disease knowledge, but perhaps through
deeper insight into already available information which
relates GERD-knowledge more adequately to attitudes
and skills.


Two major impressions of group responses were referred
to by the by-sitter (HP) and the educator (JU) when the
participants were encouraged to disclose worries and dis


**Table 3: Associations between change in GERD-knowledge from 2 to 12 months follow-up and change in QoL-scores (DSIQ and GHQ-**
**30 and their subscales).**






|Col1|Digesti|veSympto|msand|ImpactQue|stionnaire|DSIQ<br>–|Ge|neralHealthQuest|Col10|ionnaire v. 30 – GHQ|Col12|30<br>-|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||**_Pain &_**|**_Gastric_**|**_Health_**|<br>**_Life_**|**_Reflux_**|**_Sum_**|**_Anxiety_**|**_Well-_**|**_Depr._**|**_Coping_**|**_Social_**|**_Likert_**|
||**_bowel s._**|**_dysfunc._**|**_impair._**|**_impair._**||**_score_**||**_being_**|||**_dysfunc._**|**_sum sc_**|
|**All**|0.2|0.2|0.1|0.3|0.02|0.3|0.44|0.38|0.30|0.8|0.2|0.03|
|**patients**|(0.18)|(0.18)|(0.59)|(0.10)|(0.84)|(0.13)|(0.25)|(0.46)|(0.50)|(0.06)|(0.60)|(0.15)|
|**Advanced**|0.1|0.0 (1.0)|0.2|0.1|0.05|0.02|0.6|- 0.8|0.8|**1.0**|0.2|0.04|
|**school**|(0.65)||(0.51)|(0.66)|(0.76)|(0.57)|(0.16)|(0.22)|(0.22)|**(0.05)**|(0.49)|(0.08)|
|**Primary**|0.5|**0.7**|0.07|**0.8**|- 0.01|**0.8**|- 0.04|- 0.43|- 0.2|0.2|- 0.04|0.0|
|**school**|(0.09)|**(0.01)**|(0.81)|**(0.01)**|(0.95)|**(0.04)**|(0.96)|(0.63)|(0.79)|(0.81)|(0.95)|(0.92)|
|**only**|||||||||||||



Numbers are β -values (p) in linear regression analyses adjusted for selected baseline variables (see text) with change in GERD-knowledge as
dependent variable. Positive numbers indicate a reduced quality of life with increasing GERD-knowledge. β -values (p < 0.05) are in bold.


Page 6 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236



ease experiences: Participants expressed relief when realizing their experience of symptoms was shared with others
in the group and pleasure in sharing ideas on how to man
age symptoms.


The educational method applied in our study was "structured dialogue", inspired by the South American pedagogue Paulo Freires "liberation pedagogy". In practice this
means introducing medical information while checking
out if the patients recognise this within their own "universe of experience". This method has elements of cognitive behavioural therapy – as cognitive behavioural
therapy has educational elements. Further research is
needed to explore these comparative procedures.


Some critical points of the study need to be commented
on: Our major outcome variable, GERD-knowledge, was
not recorded at baseline. The reason for this was two-fold:
1) a knowledge test was by itself considered to be educational, which opposed the notion of the control group as
one which was "treated as usual". 2) By random allocation we felt justified to assume that variables of importance for learning and level of preintervention knowledge
would be equal in the two groups, thus a post intervention comparison would represent the effect of the education program.


Our results may not be valid for patients with severe
GERD. Patients with severe GERD tend to be followed up
by gastroenterologists at the hospital and thus receive
other information that could influence upon the outcome. Furthermore, the study population, patients with
mild GERD, might possess a "ceiling effect", i.e. the
impact of disease might actually be too small to allow any
intervention to lead to clinically and statistically significant improvement. Another weakness of our study was
our knowledge test which was constructed by medical
doctors paying attention to factual knowledge of medical
relevance. Lorig et al [23]M:/GAR/REFS/felles.ref #334;
points out the importance of patient involvement when
defining learning goals in patient education. We recognise
that a future knowledge test perhaps should be constructed in close collaboration with experienced patients
defining goals relevant to living with the disease. However, other disease related knowledge tests have been constructed in the same manner [11] and the knowledge
themes we tested were agreed upon by experienced doctors and therefore represented information which presumably would be conveyed within doctor-patient
consultations. If so, our study shows that our GERD-education program supersedes patient information given
within the usual consultation context.



**Conclusion**
The group based education program in patients with
GERD increased disease related knowledge. Patients with
primary school only, minor psychiatric disease and a low
QoL achieved a lower knowledge level and deserve special
attention in future educational programs. Change in
knowledge was not associated with change in quality of
life which indicates a complex association between the
two which needs to be further explored.


**Appendix**
Knowledge test for patients concerning gastroesophageal
reflux disease: Statement – and its correct characteristic as

true or false.


1. Reflux disease is a rare disease – false.


2. Bloating is a symptom in reflux disease – false.


3. Cough may be a symptom of reflux disease – true.


4. Difficulties with swallowing may occur in reflux disease

– true.


5 – 8: Which of the following occurs during an episode of
reflux?


5. – The sphincter muscle between the stomach and the
esophagus relaxes – true.


6. – The esophagus tightens – false.


7. – Acid leaks from the stomach into the esophagus –

true.


8. – The production of bile increases – false.


9. Small meals will often increase reflux – false.


10. Fatty foods will often increase reflux – true.


11. Coffee will often aggravate reflux – true.


12. Late night meals may stimulate reflux – true


13. Bending forwards may worsen reflux – true


14. Nervousness is a cause of reflux disease – false.


15. Sedatives are an important treatment in reflux disease
– false.


16. Medicine stimulating intestinal motility is used
against reflux disease – true.


Page 7 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


_BMC Health Services Research_ 2008, **8** :236 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236



17. Acid production inhibitors are used against reflux dis
ease – true.


18. Reflux may inflict ulcer in the esophagus – true.


19. Reflux may inflict ulcer in the stomach – false.


20. Constriction of the esophagus may occur as a consequence of reflux – true.


21. Reflux disease may lead to heart disease – false.


22. Blood tests may be used to prove a diagnosis of reflux
– false.


23. Gastroscopy is an important investigation in reflux
disease – true.


24. If in doubt one can measure the acidity in the stomach
to clarify a diagnosis of reflux disease – false.


**Competing interests**
The study was funded by an unrestricted grant from Glaxo
Smith Kline, Norway, and supported by the Central
Regional Health Authority and the Norwegian Fund for
Health and Rehabilitation.


**Authors' contributions**
JU conducted the study, performed statistical analyses and
wrote the manuscript. HP initiated the study, reviewed
patient referrals and gastroscopy reports for patient inclusion and contributed through all stages as senior
researcher. PF contributed as senior researcher in concluding the study and writing the manuscript.


**Acknowledgements**
Professor Terje Johannessen participated in the early stages of the study
project and reviewed the GERD patient education program.


**References**

1. Borgaonkar MR, Townson G, Donnelly M, Irvine EJ: **[Providing dis-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12131610)**
**[ease-related information worsens health-related quality of](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12131610)**
**[life in inflammatory bowel disease.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12131610)** _Inflamm Bowel Dis_ 2002,
**8:** 264-269.
2. Ellis SE, Speroff T, Dittus RS, Brown A, Pichert JW, Elasy TA: **[Diabe-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14729296)**
**[tes patient education: a meta-analysis and meta-regression.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14729296)**
_Patient Educ Couns_ 2004, **52:** 97-105.
3. Gallefoss F: _The effects of patient education in asthma and COPD_ PhD
thesis. University of Bergen; 2001.
4. Griffiths C, Foster G, Ramsay J, Eldridge S, Taylor S: **[How effective](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17569933)**
**[are expert patient (lay led) education programmes for](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17569933)**
**[chronic disease?](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17569933)** _BMJ_ 2007, **334:** 1254-1256.
5. Kennedy AP, Nelson E, Reeves D, Richardson G, Roberts C, Robinson A, _et al._ : **[A randomised controlled trial to assess the effec-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15479685)**
**[tiveness and cost of a patient orientated self management](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15479685)**
**[approach to chronic inflammatory bowel disease.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15479685)** _Gut_ 2004,
**53:** 1639-1645.
6. Lorig KR, Sobel DS, Stewart AL, Brown BW Jr, Bandura A, Ritter P,
_et al._ : **[Evidence suggesting that a chronic disease self-manage-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10413387)**
**[ment program can improve health status while reducing](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10413387)**
**[hospitalization: a randomized trial.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10413387)** _Med Care_ 1999, **37:** 5-14.



7. Nunez M, Nunez E, Yoldi C, Quinto L, Hernandez MV, MunozGomez J: **[Health-related quality of life in rheumatoid arthritis:](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16247548)**
**[therapeutic education plus pharmacological treatment ver-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16247548)**
**[sus pharmacological treatment only.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16247548)** _Rheumatol Int_ 2006,
**26:** 752-757.
8. Shepanski MA, Hurd LB, Culton K, Markowitz JE, Mamula P, Baldassano RN: **[Health-related quality of life improves in children](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15677910)**
**and adolescents with inflammatory bowel disease after**
**[attending a camp sponsored by the Crohn's and Colitis](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15677910)**
**[Foundation of America.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15677910)** _Inflamm Bowel Dis_ 2005, **11:** 164-170.
9. Urnes J, Farup PG, Lydersen S, Petersen H: **[Patient education in](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17998836)**
**[gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: a randomized controlled](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17998836)**
**trial.** _Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol_ 2007, **19:** 1104-1110.
10. Bregenzer N, Lange A, Furst A, Gross V, Scholmerich J, Andus T:
**Patient education in inflammatory bowel disease does not**
**influence patients knowledge and long-term psychosocial**
**[well-being.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15830302)** _Z Gastroenterol_ 2005, **43:** 367-371.
11. Eaden JA, Abrams K, Mayberry JF: **[The Crohn's and Colitis](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10606319)**
**[Knowledge Score: a test for measuring patient knowledge in](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10606319)**
**[inflammatory bowel disease.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10606319)** _Am J Gastroenterol_ 1999,
**94:** 3560-3566.
12. O'Sullivan MA, Mahmud N, Kelleher DP, Lovett E, O'Morain CA:
**[Patient knowledge and educational needs in irritable bowel](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10656208)**
**[syndrome.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10656208)** _Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol_ 2000, **12:** 39-43.
13. Trento M, Passera P, Borgo E, Tomalino M, Bajardi M, Cavallo F, _et al._ :
**A 5-year randomized controlled study of learning, problem**
**solving ability, and quality of life modifications in people with**
**[type 2 diabetes managed by group care.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14988283)** _Diabetes Care_ 2004,
**27:** 670-675.
14. Bloom B: _Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, Handbook I_ The Cognitive
Domain. New York: David McKay Co Inc; 1956.
15. Dave R: _Developing and Writing Behavioural Objectives_ Educational Innovators Press; 1975.
16. Harrow A: _A taxonomy of psychomotor domain – a guide for developing_
_behavioural objectives_ New York: David McKay; 1972.
17. Simpson E: _The Classification of Educational Objectives in Psychomotor_
_Domain_ Washington DC: Gryphon House; 1972.
18. Huppert FA, Gore M, Elliott BJ: **[The value of an improved scoring](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=3270825)**
**[system (CGHQ) for the General Health Questionnaire in a](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=3270825)**
**[representative community sample.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=3270825)** _Psychol Med_ 1988,
**18:** 1001-1006.
19. Urnes J, Johannessen T, Farup PG, Lydersen S, Petersen H: **[Digestive](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16938714)**
**[symptoms and their psychosocial impact: validation of a](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16938714)**
**[questionnaire.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16938714)** _Scand J Gastroenterol_ 2006, **41:** 1019-1027.
20. Aronson BS: **[Applying clinical practice guidelines to a patient](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11310080)**
**[with complicated gastroesophageal reflux disease.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11310080)** _Gastroen-_
_terol Nurs_ 2000, **23:** 143-147.
21. DeVault KR, Castell DO: **[Updated guidelines for the diagnosis](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15654800)**
**[and treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15654800)** _Am J Gas-_
_troenterol_ 2005, **100:** 190-200.
22. Quan H, Present JW, Sutherland LR: **[Evaluation of educational](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14671484)**
**[programs in inflammatory bowel disease.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14671484)** _Inflamm Bowel Dis_
2003, **9:** 356-362.
23. Lorig K: _Patient Education. A practical approach_ Thousand Oaks-London-New Dehli: Sage Publications Ltd; 2001.
24. Lucock MP, Morley S, White C, Peake MD: **[Responses of consecu-](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9302953)**
**[tive patients to reassurance after gastroscopy: results of self](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9302953)**
**[administered questionnaire survey.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9302953)** _BMJ_ 1997, **315:** 572-575.


**Pre-publication history**
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here:


                          [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472](http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/8/236/prepub) 6963/8/236/pre
pub


Page 8 of 8


_(page number not for citation purposes)_


