CLINICS 2010;65(9):857-863 DOI:10.1590/S1807-59322010000900008

## CLINICAL SCIENCE

# How to avoid discontinuation of antihypertensive treatment. The experience in Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil


Katia Coelho Ortega, [I] Josiane Lima de Gusma˜o, [I,III] Angela Maria Geraldo Pierin, [II] Jose´ Luiz Nishiura, [I]

Edna Caetano Ignez, [I] Carlos Alexandre Segre, [I] Carlucci Gualberto Ventura, [I] Gisele Peixoto Mano, [II]

Viviane Fontes, [II] Francisco Mogadouro da Cunha, [I] De´cio Mion, Jr. [I]


I Hypertension Unit, Hospital das Clı´nicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Sa˜o Paulo, Sa˜o Paulo, SP, Brazil. II Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade
de Sa˜o Paulo, Sa˜o Paulo, SP, Brazil. [III] Guarulhos University, Guarulhos, SP, Brazil.



INTRODUCTION


Most patients with hypertension do not benefit from
treatment. [1] Data from NHANES/NCHS 1999–2004 showed
that 71.8% of individuals were aware of their condition,
61.4% were under current treatment and 35.1% had it under
control. [2] Although the percentage of individuals with
controlled blood pressure in Brazil is unknown, we estimate
it to be low because the percentage of patients with their
high blood pressure under control is around 30-35% at
outpatient clinics that specialize in hypertension, and these
clinics do not represent the national reality. [3]


Copyright � 2010 CLINICS – This is an Open Access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited.



Many reasons exist for non-adherence to medical regimens, including adverse drug effects, poor instructions,
poor provider-patient relationship, poor memory, a
patient’s disagreement with the need for treatment or
inability to afford medication. [4,5] One of the strategies
employed to improve treatment compliance is the use of
active telephone calls [6] to patients through which they are
given guidance and treatment questions are answered.
Using this strategy, several studies have shown an increase
in treatment compliance, a higher percentage of blood
pressure control [6-8] and a decrease in mortality. [9-11]

Another strategy that aims at improving treatment
compliance is the employment of two low-dose medications. Evidence suggests that the combination of two
antihypertensive agents provides a higher percentage of
blood pressure control due to complementary mechanisms
of action. In addition, this results in better tolerability and
consequently, better treatment compliance. [12-14]



857


Compliance with antihypertensive treatment
Ortega KC et al.


The ASCOT study [15] (Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes
Trial) has indicated a significant reduction in all causes of
mortality with the use of current medications for treating
hypertension: calcium channel antagonists and angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors. It has also been demonstrated
that a high incidence of adverse events may decrease
treatment compliance. However, in the LIFE [16] study,
angiotensin receptor antagonists proved to be better at
reducing the risks related to cardiovascular events and they
resulted in a lower rate of treatment discontinuation when
compared to a beta-blocker.

In view of these data, we evaluated the importance of
providing guidelines to patients via active telephone calls
for blood pressure management and preventing treatment
discontinuation in hypertensive patients. We used two
treatment regimens with low-dose medications that were
offered for free to avoid the influence of financial factors.
We opted for one regimen called ‘‘traditional’’ based on
diuretics and beta-blockers and another called ‘‘current’’
based on angiotensin II antagonists and calcium channel
blockers.


METHODS


The study participants were selected at the Hypertension
Unit, University of Sa˜o Paulo General Hospital, Nephrology
Division, University of Sa˜o Paulo School of Medicine. The
patients had essential hypertension and were able to receive
telephone calls to be reminded of their medical appointments and be given guidance about hypertension. Patients
were of both genders, from diverse ethnic backgrounds,
over 18 years of age, and had body mass indices below
40 kg/m [2] . The patients were enrolled in the study after
signing a free and informed consent form. The study was
approved by the Ethics Committee of the Board of Directors
of the University of Sa˜o Paulo School of Medicine.

Patients were excluded on several bases, including blood
pressure,140/90 mmHg without antihypertensive medication, secondary hypertension, white-coat hypertension
with systolic pressures $140 mmHg and/or diastolic
pressures $90 mmHg at the doctor’s office and awake
mean systolic pressures,135 mmHg or awake mean
diastolic pressures,85 mmHg without antihypertensive
medication, malignant hypertension and patients with a
previous history of hypersensitivity reaction to the study
medications. Other exclusion criteria were as follows:
pregnant women or nursing mothers, the presence of liver
dysfunction evidenced by the patient’s clinical history or by
one of the liver function tests (levels twice the normal values
for alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase), patients with clinical conditions that might
interfere with the total conformity with the study or those
who might have an increased risk for participating in the
study, patients with a history of alcoholism, drug abuse or
mental disorders that might invalidate the free and
informed consent or limit the patient’s ability to meet the
protocol rules and patients who had participated in any
other studies involving investigational drugs or drugs
already marketed within the previous month before enrollment in this study or concomitantly with this study.


Blood Pressure Measurement

Blood pressure and heart rate measurements were
performed on the right upper limb on sitting patients five



CLINICS 2010;65(9):857-863


times by the nursing staff using an appropriately sized cuff
with a validated automatic oscillometric device (Dixtal,
DX2710, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil). [17] The mean of the last two
measurements was calculated and recorded if the difference
between these measurements was less than 4 mmHg. If after
the five measurements the difference between the last two
was greater than 4 mmHg, the measurement was repeated
until the difference between the two measurements was less
than 4 mmHg. During the study, blood pressure measurements were always performed in the afternoon by the same
nursing staff using the same device.

The diagnosis of hypertension was made when the mean
values of the last two measurements were as follows:
systolic pressure $140 mmHg and/or diastolic pressure
$90 mmHg with or without medication at the initial visit
(Visit 0). Patients who were receiving antihypertensive
medication at the initial visit and had a systolic pressure
,140 mmHg or a diastolic pressure,90 mmHg were reevaluated eight weeks after discontinuation of their medication and introduction of placebo; these patients were
included in the study when the mean values included a
systolic pressure $140 mmHg and/or a diastolic pressure
$90 mmHg.

Controlled blood pressure was defined in two levels as
(with the patient in the seated position) a systolic/diastolic
pressure less than 140/90 or 120/80 mmHg.

All of the patients underwent Ambulatory Blood Pressure
Monitoring (ABPM), which was performed with a validated
oscillometric device (SpaceLabs 90207, SpaceLabs Inc,
Richmond, WA, USA), [18,19] five weeks after the start of the
placebo to eliminate cases of patients with white-coat
hypertension and, in patients who did not receive placebo,
to identify the white-coat effect.

According to clinical characteristics, the patients were
assigned to two groups: a) ‘‘uncomplicated’’– hypertensive
patients without complications and without other concurrent diseases and b) ‘‘complicated’’- patients with severe
hypertension (mean diastolic pressure $110 mmHg with or
without medication) or comorbidities such as diabetes
mellitus, renal failure (serum creatinine .1.4 mg/dL),
coronary insufficiency, congestive heart failure or prior
history of cerebrovascular accident.


Patient Randomization

All patients, from both the complicated and the uncomplicated groups, were open-block randomized to receive
active telephone calls (‘‘phone calls’’ group) or not to receive
telephone calls (‘‘no phone calls’’ group) and to follow two
treatment regimens, ‘‘traditional’’ or ‘‘current’’.

Thus, after the first visit and randomization, patients from
the ‘‘phone calls’’ group were invited to enroll by telephone
in a program called ‘‘Biosinte´tica Assistance’’, supported by
Biosinte´tica Laboratory. The patients who subscribed
started receiving active telephone calls from appropriately
trained operators and also started receiving magazines with
health-related information, which were sent periodically by
mail. There were six contacts by telephone during the study.
During phone calls, the patient was reminded to attend the
next visit, and he/she was educated about hypertension and
any necessary clarifications about his/her treatment. All
patients randomized to the ‘‘phone calls’’ group were
invited to attend occasional informative lectures with the
participation of a multidisciplinary team.



858


CLINICS 2010;65(9):857-863 Compliance with antihypertensive treatment

Ortega KC et al.



At the initial stage of treatment (following eight weeks
of treatment with placebo), the ‘‘uncomplicated’’ group
received one of the following treatment regimens: a)
‘‘traditional’’ treatment with 6.25 mg 2x/day hydrochlorothiazide and 25 mg 2x/day atenolol; b) ‘‘current’’ treatment with 25 mg 2x/day losartan and 2.5 mg 2x/day
amlodipine. If the blood pressure could not be controlled
during the visits, the medication doses were doubled or
another antihypertensive was added. The ‘‘complicated’’
group did not undergo the treatment period with placebo
and was randomized to receive either ‘‘traditional’’ or
‘‘current’’ drug regimens similar to the ones administered to
the ‘‘uncomplicated’’ group, though the specifics of each
condition were carefully considered. The addition of other
antihypertensive agents in the ‘‘uncomplicated’’ group and
the specificities of the patient regimens in the ‘‘complicated’’
group were performed according to the guidelines from
the V Brazilian Guidelines on Arterial Hypertension. [3]

All patients were instructed to take their medication every
day at 7:00 AM and 7:00 PM, with a variation of up to one
hour. A 12-month supply of the necessary medication was
supplied to the patients by the physician at the end of the
visit at no cost to eliminate the financial factor in this
analysis; patients were given enough medication to last
between visits. Patients were instructed to bring the
remaining pills to their subsequent visits, at which time
they were counted by the nursing staff without the patients’
knowledge of this procedure.

Doctors’ visits, preceded by the nursing staff visit, took
place every eight weeks for 56 weeks and included
measurements of blood pressure, heart rate and weight.
The weight was checked with the patient wearing light
clothes standing barefoot on a scale (model 2096PP, Toledo
do Brasil, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil).

Study withdrawal was characterized by non-attendance to
appointments for up to three months after the scheduled
date. Patients who returned to the medical clinic within three

months after the scheduled date were allowed to continue in
the study and be evaluated in an unscheduled visit.

The tests performed during the placebo treatment and
after 40 weeks of active treatments included the following:
fasting glucose, urea, creatinine, total cholesterol, fractions
of cholesterol, triglycerides, uric acid, total bilirubin,
creatine phosphokinase (CPK), sodium (Na+), potassium


Table 1 - Study groups demographics.



(K+), hemoglobin, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH),
alkaline phosphatase, aspartate aminotransferase (AST),
alanine aminotranferase (ALT) and urinary excretion of
sodium in 24 h.


Statistical Analysis

Data were analyzed using an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) according to the factor of controlled or uncontrolled hypertension. P,0.05 was considered statistically
significant.


RESULTS


The study included 398 patients. Of those, 44 were
excluded for the following reasons: a) lack of enrollment
in the Biosinte´tica Assistance program (n = 17); b) body mass
index .40 kg/m [2] (n = 6); c) secondary hypertension (n = 4);
d) white-coat hypertension (n = 3); e) white-coat normotension (‘‘masked hypertension’’) (n = 3); f) alcohol use (n = 2);
g) classification error (n = 4); h) refusal to do ABPM (n = 2); i)
loss of blood pressure measurements from the first visit
(n = 1); j) pregnancy (n = 1); k) death (n = 1). A total of 354
patients were evaluated.

There were no statistically significant differences in age,
gender, skin color, body mass index, blood pressure or heart
rate between the groups classified as: ‘‘complicated’’
(n = 175) and ‘‘uncomplicated’’ (n = 179); ‘‘traditional’’
(n = 176) and ‘‘current’’ (n = 178); ‘‘phone calls’’ (n = 108)
and ‘‘no phone calls’’ (n = 246) (Table 1). In addition, no
differences were seen in marital status, education or
occupation.


a) Control of Blood Pressure

A marked reduction in blood pressure was seen in
patients from both the ‘‘complicated’’ and ‘‘uncomplicated’’
groups (Table 2). The blood pressure was reduced by
19¡10/20¡14 mmHg in the ‘‘uncomplicated’’ group and
by 18¡14/22¡17 mmHg (systolic/diastolic) in the ‘‘complicated’’ group (p.0.05; n = 354).

The ‘‘phone calls’’ and ‘‘no phone calls’’ groups showed
significantly lower blood pressures at the end of treatment
(p, 0.00001). The ‘‘traditional’’ and ‘‘current’’ groups
showed significantly lower blood pressures at the end of
treatment (Figure 1).



|Col1|Uncomplicated n = 179|Complicated n = 175|Traditional n = 176|Current n = 178|No Phone Calls n = 246|Phone Calls n = 108|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Age (years)|53¡11|53¡11|54¡11|52¡11|54¡11|52¡11|
|Gender (%)|||||||
|Male|27|41|33|34|33|34|
|Female|73|59|67|66|67|66|
|Skin color (%)|||||||
|Whites|62|52|60|54|56|60|
|Non-whites|38|48|40|46|44|40|
|BMI (kg/m2)|29¡4|29¡4|29¡4|29¡4|29¡4|29¡4|
|Blood Pressure|at Randomization (mmHg)||||||
|Systolic|155¡12|163¡24|159¡19|158¡19|159¡19|158¡19|
|Diastolic|91¡10|102¡20|96¡17|97¡16|97¡16|97¡17|
|Heart rate|80¡13|83¡13|81¡13|82¡13|82¡13|82¡13|


Data are shown as mean¡s.d.; BMI = Body Mass Index; p.0.05: ‘‘complicated’’ vs. ‘‘uncomplicated’’, ‘‘traditional’’ vs. ‘‘current’’, ‘‘phone calls’’ vs. ‘‘no
phone calls’’ for age, gender, skin color and BMI.
Blood pressure at randomization: uncomplicated vs. complicated groups: systolic – t = 3.78, p = 0.0002; diastolic – t = 6.44, p,0.000001; FC – t = 2.41,
p = 0.016


859


Compliance with antihypertensive treatment
Ortega KC et al.


Table 2 - Blood pressure (mmHg) at the beginning and
end of the 12-month treatment in the ‘‘uncomplicated’’
and ‘‘complicated’’ groups, according to the
‘‘traditional’’ and ‘‘current’’ treatments and
randomization into the ‘‘phone calls’’ and ‘‘no phone
calls’’ groups.

|Group|RandomizationVisit|FinalVisit|
|---|---|---|
|Uncomplicated (n = 179)|155¡12/91¡10|126¡14*/73¡11*|
|‘‘Traditional’’ Treatment (n = 90)|155¡12/91¡9|126¡14*/71¡11*|
|‘‘Current’’ Treatment (n = 89)|155¡12/92¡10|126¡15*/74¡11*|
|‘‘No Phone Calls’’ (n = 119)|156¡13/91¡10|127¡16*/73¡12*|
|‘‘Phone Calls’’ (n = 60)|154¡11/92¡9|125¡11*/73¡10*|
|Complicated (n = 175)|163¡24/102¡20|131¡19*/78¡14*|
|‘‘Traditional’’ Treatment (n = 86)|164¡24/102¡21|132¡21*/77¡16*|
|‘‘Current’’ Treatment (n = 89)|161¡23/102¡19|130¡18*/78¡12*|
|‘‘No Phone Calls’’ (n = 127)|162¡23/102¡19|132¡20*/79¡15*|
|‘‘Phone Calls’’ (n = 48)|163¡25/103¡22|127¡18*/75¡11*|



Data are shown as mean¡s.d.; *p, 0.00001 – Randomization Visit versus
Final Visit.


The percentage of patients with controlled blood pressure
(,140/90 mmHg) was also high at the end of treatment
(74%). On the other hand, the percentage of patients with
blood pressure reduced to,120/80 mmHg was only 29%.
There was no difference in the percentage of patients with
controlled blood pressure between the ‘‘phone calls’’ and
‘‘no phone calls’’ groups or in the reduction of blood
pressure and the percentage of patients with controlled
blood pressure among the ‘‘traditional’’ and ‘‘current’’
treatments. However, patients in the ‘‘phone calls’’ group
(80%) had better blood pressure control than those in the
‘‘no phone calls’’ group (71%), though the difference was
not statistically significant. The ‘‘uncomplicated’’ and
‘‘complicated’’ groups had statistically significant differences in the percentage of patients with controlled blood
pressure (,140/90 mmHg) (80% vs. 67%, respectively;
p,0.000001). At the next to last study visit (visit 7), 90%



CLINICS 2010;65(9):857-863


Table 3 - Percentage of patients with controlled blood
pressure at the beginning (randomization visit), at the
next-to-last visit (visit 7) and at the end (visit 8-final) of
the 12-month treatment period.


|Group|RandomizationVisit|Visit7|FinalVisit|
|---|---|---|---|
|‘‘Uncomplicated’’|0*/0**|90*/31|80/30|
|‘‘Complicated’’|16/6|66/31|67/28|
|‘‘Traditional’’ Treatment|8/3|75/32|73/31|
|‘‘Current’’ Treatment|11/3|81/30|74/27|
|‘‘Phone Calls’’|8/3|84/32|80/33|
|‘‘No Phone Calls’’|8/3|75/30|71/27|
|Total|8/3|78/31|74/29|



Controlled blood pressure:, 140/90 mmHg/120/80 mmHg.
p .0.05, except:
N *Uncomplicated versus complicated: Randomization visit - x [2] 1 [= 28.94;]

p,0.000001 (SBP,140/DBP,90)
N **Uncomplicated versus complicated: Randomization visit - x [2] 1 [= 8.55;]

p = 0.0035 (SBP,120/DBP,80)
N Uncomplicated versus complicated: Visit 7 - x [2] 1 [= 28.84; p][,][0.000001]

(SBP,140/DBP,90)


and 66% of patients had blood pressure measurements
,140/90 mmHg in the ‘‘uncomplicated’’ and ‘‘complicated’’ groups, respectively. However, there was no
difference in the percentage of patients with blood pressure
,120/80 mmHg (31% on the final visit in both groups,
Table 3).

Among patients with a blood pressure,140/90 mmHg at
the final visit, only 3% had received only one type of
antihypertensive medication; most patients (56%) received 2
(34%) or 3 (22%) types of antihypertensive medication
(Table 4).


b) Treatment Discontinuation

A significantly lower number of patients in the ‘‘phone
calls’’ group quit the treatment compared to the ‘‘no phone



Figure 1 - IASH 2009 How to avoid discontinuation of antihypertensive treatment: the experience in Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil.


860


CLINICS 2010;65(9):857-863 Compliance with antihypertensive treatment

Ortega KC et al.



Table 4 - Number of antihypertensive medications in use
at the end of the study in patients who achieved control
(,140/90 mmHg) of their blood pressure at the end of the
12-month study.









|Numberof|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Antihypertensive|Blood Pressure|Blood Pressure||
|Medications|,140/90 mmHg|.140/90 mmHg|Total|
|01|3.2%|1.0%|4.2%|
|02|34.4%|5.0%|39.4%|
|03|21.9%|6.8%|28.7%|
|04|12.2%|6.8%|19.0%|
|05|3.9%|2.9%|6.8%|
|06|1.6%|0.3%|1.9%|
|Total|77.2%|22.8%|100%|


calls’’ group (4 vs. 30, respectively; Figure 2). There was no
difference in the percentage discontinuation in the ‘‘complicated’’ and ‘‘uncomplicated’’ groups or in the ‘‘current’’
and ‘‘traditional’’ treatment regimens (p.0.05).


c) Tablet Count

Patients in the groups: ‘‘complicated’’ and ‘‘uncomplicated’’; ‘‘traditional’’ and ‘‘current’’; ‘‘phone calls’’ and ‘‘no
phone calls’’ did not show statistically significant differences in medication intake, as verified by counting the
tablets returned at the visits. Compliance was over 85% at
all visits. However, patients in the current + uncomplicated
+ phone call group had the highest rate of compliance (93%).
The lowest rate of compliance occurred in the traditional +
uncomplicated + no phone call group (85%) (p.0.05).


d) Body Weight

Blood pressure reductions occurred in the presence of
increased body weight (baseline visit: 73¡14 kg; final visit:
74¡14 kg, p = 0.0008, Table 5).


e) Adverse Events and Laboratory Tests

Most of the adverse events that occurred during the study
were of light or moderate intensity. Patients in the


Figure 2 - Discontinuation of antihypertensive treatment.



Table 5 - Weight (kg) at the beginning and end of the
treatment.

|Group|RandomizationVisit|FinalVisit|PValue|
|---|---|---|---|
|‘‘Uncomplicated’’|72¡12|73¡13|0.39|
|‘‘Complicated’’|74¡15|76¡15|0.007|
|‘‘Traditional’’|74¡15|74¡15|0.09|
|Treatment||||
|‘‘Current’’ Treatment|73¡13|74¡13|0.005|
|‘‘Phone Calls’’|74¡14|74¡15|0.13|
|‘‘No Phone Calls’’|73¡14|74¡14|0.018|
|Total|73¡14|74¡14|0.0008|



Data are shown as mean¡s.d.


‘‘traditional’’ group showed significantly more depression
symptoms (5 vs. 0) and coughing (30 vs. 4) when compared
with patients in the ‘‘current’’ treatment group. On the other
hand, patients in the ‘‘current’’ group had a greater number
of complaints of dizziness when compared to patients in the
‘‘traditional’’ treatment group (63 vs. 42, respectively).

Compared to patients in the ‘‘uncomplicated’’ group,
patients in the ‘‘complicated’’ group presented a larger
number the following symptoms: abdominal pain (19 vs. 8),
sleepiness (32 vs. 10), cough (23 vs. 11), weakness (23 vs. 11)
and blurred vision (6 vs. 0). Conversely, compared to
patients in the ‘‘complicated’’ group, patients in the
‘‘uncomplicated’’ group presented a larger number of
complaints such as pain (74 vs. 53) and headache (80 vs.
59). Patients in the ‘‘phone calls’’ group reported a 34% rate
of symptoms, while a 66% rate of symptoms was reported
by patients in the ‘‘no phone calls’’ group. The most
frequently (.10%) found adverse events were as follows:
headache (62.1%), unspecific pain (58.2%), dizziness
(45.8%), edema (40.1%), fatigue (15.3%), sleepiness (14.4%),
cough (13.3%), precordial pain (13.3%), weakness (11.9%),
tachycardia (11.3%), insomnia (10.5%) and paresthesia
(10.5%). There were 26 (8%) severe adverse events: death
(5), unstable angina (4), acute myocardial infarction (1),
transient ischemic attack (1), hypertensive encephalopathy
(1), breast cancer (3), bronchospastic crisis (1), cholecysto


861


Compliance with antihypertensive treatment
Ortega KC et al.


pathy (1), diabetic decompensation (1), syncope (1),
nephrectomy (2), trauma (2), peritoneal bypass (1), diarrhea
(1) and gastrectomy (1).

The results of the laboratory tests performed in the
beginning and end of the study are shown in Table 6. There
was an increase in the 24-hour urinary sodium excretion
from the beginning to the end of the study (120¡46 vs.
129¡45 mEq/L, respectively; p = 0.000036)


DISCUSSION


Adherence to a medication regimen is generally defined
as the extent to which patients take medications as
prescribed by their health care providers. [20] This can be
classified into three aspects of the individual’s behavior
regarding his/her health: 1) take the medication correctly, 2)
follow the professionals’ instructions related to diets and
lifestyle changes and 3) attend medical visits. [21]

The discontinuation of medication is considered the
most serious type of noncompliance with treatment. In our
study, the ‘‘phone calls’’ group showed a significantly lower
percentage of patients who discontinued treatment compared with the ‘‘no phone calls’’ group. A meta-analysis
of randomized studies [22] suggested that treatment discontinuation is effectively avoided by contacting the patient
using letters, telephone calls or e-mails. Ma´rques Contreras
et al. [6] evaluated the efficacy of telephone and e-mail
intervention for therapeutic compliance among 538 patients
with mild to moderate hypertension and verified that the
group that received phone calls showed higher compliance
rates (96.2%) than the group that was only contacted by e-mail
(91.3%) or the group that did not receive any intervention
(69.2%). Similar data were found in a controlled study
recently conducted by Bosworth et al. [7] in which the selfreported medication adherence was shown to increase by 9%
in the group that had received behavioral and educational
intervention (319 hypertensive subjects) through telephone
calls versus 1% in the group that had not received intervention (n= 317).

Friedman et al. [23], through telephone calls associated with
usual medical care for six months, compared hypertensive
patients who received their usual medical treatment with
those who used a monitoring and counseling system.
Participants with compliance below 80% of the prescribed
medication prior to enrollment in the study showed better



CLINICS 2010;65(9):857-863


compliance with the treatment when the telephone monitoring system was used than did patients who did not use
the system (36% vs. 26%, respectively). On the other hand,
participants with a compliance level above 80% prior to
enrollment in the study did not show any change in
compliance, and compliance was comparable in users and
non-users of the telephone monitoring system.

In our study, regardless of the group to which they were
randomized, patients showed compliance rates above 85%
at all visits. However, we do not have data regarding
medication compliance before enrollment in the study.

It is important to point out that treatment compliance is
directly related to mortality. A study conducted by Wu et
al. [9] randomized 442 non-compliant patients who took five
or more medications for chronic illnesses to either receive or
not receive telephone counseling. The objective was to
investigate the influence of this advice for treatment
compliance and patient mortality. The study verified that
telephone counseling was associated with a 41% reduction
of death risk after two years. These authors used scores to
classify the levels of compliance of 1011 patients, and they
showed that the lower the level of compliance, the higher
the risk of mortality in the long term.

The influence of the initial selection of antihypertensive
medication in regards to compliance with treatment was
evaluated by Monane et al. [24] The authors verified that the
use of newer antihypertensive agents, such as angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitors and calcium channel antagonists, was associated with a compliance $80% when
compared with thiazide diuretics in patients with cardiac
morbidities and multiple visits to physicians. This may have
been the result of better tolerability to newer classes of
antihypertensive agents. However, in our study, there was
no difference in tolerability between the ‘‘traditional’’ and
‘‘current’’ groups, which could explain the similar compliance rates in both groups. On the other hand, just like in
Monane et al. [24] we found that fewer patients in the
‘‘complicated’’ group had their blood pressure under
control in the final visit (67%), whereas in the next to last
study visit, 90% of patients in the ‘‘uncomplicated’’ group
and only 66% in the ‘‘complicated’’ group had blood
pressure levels below 140/90 mmHg. This may be due to
comorbidities and the use of other concurrent treatments.

The groups: ‘‘complicated’’ and ‘‘uncomplicated’’; ‘‘traditional’’ and ‘‘current’’; ‘‘phone calls’’ and ‘‘no phone



Table 6 - Results of laboratory tests measured at the beginning and end of the study.

|Col1|Initial|Final|Testvalue|Pvalue|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Fasting Glucose (mg/dL)|108¡41|111¡41|1.82|.0.05|
|Urea (mg/dL)|32¡10|34¡16|3.83|= 0.00015|
|Creatinine (mg/dl)|0.9¡0.3|1.0¡0.4|5.52|,0.000001|
|Total Cholesterol (mg/dL)|199¡44|190¡38|5.07|= 0.000001|
|HDL Cholesterol (mg/dL)|49¡13|48¡14|1.19|.0.05|
|Triglycerides (mg/dL)|147¡123|152¡218|0.61|.0.05|
|Uric Acid (mg/dL)|5.1¡1.5|5.3¡1.8|3.90|= 0.00011|
|Sodium (mEq/L)|140¡3.2|139¡2.7|7.34|,0.000001|
|Potassium (mEq/L)|4.2¡0.5|4.2¡0.4|1.21|.0.05|
|Hemoglobin (g/dL)|14.4¡1.4|14.2¡1.3|4.73|= 0.000003|
|Alkaline Phosphatase (U/L)|79.7¡25.3|75.1¡22.7|5.29|,0.000001|
|ALT (U/L)|23.5¡10.6|26.6¡51.0|1.15|.0.05|
|AST (U/L)|24.4¡15.9|30.2¡92.5|1.18|.0.05|
|Sodium Urinary Excretion in 24 h (mEq/L)|119.6¡45.6|128.8¡45.3|12.81|= 0.000036|



Data are shown as mean¡s.d.


862


CLINICS 2010;65(9):857-863 Compliance with antihypertensive treatment

Ortega KC et al.



calls’’showed significant reductions in blood pressure from
the randomization visit to the final visit, as a high
percentage of patients with good blood pressure control
(BP,140/90 mmHg) in the total group (74%), regardless of
an increase in body weight throughout the study.

In our study, the high percentage patients with controlled
blood pressure at the end of treatment can be explained by
the simple drug regimen, the simple drug acquisition
provided by the physician at no cost at the end of each
visit, a fixed team of physicians and nurses throughout the
study period and the easy access to team members in cases
of unexpected occurrences by means of unscheduled visits.

We observed that in the next-to-last study visit, the
‘‘uncomplicated’’, ‘‘current’’, ‘‘traditional’’, ‘‘phone calls’’
and ‘‘no phone calls’’ groups had more patients with
controlled blood pressure when compared to the last visit. It
is possible that during the last visit the patients were
worried about continuing the treatment and receiving the
medications.

Therefore, guidance provided to patients by means of
active telephone calls, brochures and group workshops with
healthcare professionals is an efficient strategy for reducing
treatment discontinuation, the most severe type of noncompliance with treatment.


Perspectives

In an attempt to reduce non-adherence to antihypertensive treatment determinants in a developing country, we
demonstrated that better blood pressure control was
obtained through doctor’s visits every two months with
the same physician preceded by nursing staff visits with
patients receiving all medication necessary for their treatment; this benefit was independent of comorbidities and the
type of treatment used. Guidance provided to the patients
through active telephone calls, brochures, group workshops
with healthcare professionals and donation of all the
required medications significantly reduced the treatment
discontinuation rates.


Sources of Funding

This study received support from ‘‘Biosintetica Assistance’’ and Biosinte´tica Laboratory, which donated all of the
required medication.


REFERENCES


[1. Rosamond W, Flegal K, Furie K, Go A, Greenlund K, Haase N, et al. For](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2FCIRCULATIONAHA.107.187998)

[the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2FCIRCULATIONAHA.107.187998)

[Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke statistics 2008](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2FCIRCULATIONAHA.107.187998)
[update: a report from the American Heart Statitistics Committee and](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2FCIRCULATIONAHA.107.187998)
[Stroke Subcommittee. Circulation. 2008;117:e25-e146, doi: 10.1161/](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2FCIRCULATIONAHA.107.187998)
[CIRCULATIONAHA.107.187998.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2FCIRCULATIONAHA.107.187998)
[2. Ong KL, Cheung BMY, Man YB, Lau CP, Lam KSL. Prevalence,](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2F01.HYP.0000252676.46043.18)

[awareness, treatment and control of hypertension among United States](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2F01.HYP.0000252676.46043.18)
[adults 1999–2004. Hypertension. 2007;49:69-75, doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2F01.HYP.0000252676.46043.18)
[0000252676.46043.18.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1161%2F01.HYP.0000252676.46043.18)
3. V Brazilian Guidelines in Arterial Hypertension. Arq Bras Cardiol.
2007;89:e24-79.
4. Haynes RB, Ackloo E, Sahota N, McDonald HP, Yao X. Interventions for

enhancing medication adherence (Cochrane Review). In:The Cochrane
Library, Issue3, 2008.



[5. Gusma˜o JL de, Mion D Jr, Pierin AMG. Health-related quality of life and](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS1807-59322009000700003)

[blood pressure control in hypertensive patients with and without complica-](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS1807-59322009000700003)
[tions. Clinics, 2009;64:619-28, doi: 10.1590/S1807-59322009000700003.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS1807-59322009000700003)
[6. Ma´rquez CE, Vegazo GO, Claros NM, Gil GV, de la Figuera von](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050510008977)

[Wichmann M, et al. Efficacy of telephone and mail intervention in](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050510008977)
[patient compliance with antihypertensive drugs in hypertension.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050510008977)
[ETECUM-HTA study. Blood Press. 2005;14:151-8, doi: 10.1080/](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050510008977)
[08037050510008977.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050510008977)
[7. Bosworth HB, Olsen MK, Neary A, Orr M, Grubber J, Syetkey L, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.pec.2007.11.014)

[Take Control of Your Blood pressure (TCYB) study: a multifatorial](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.pec.2007.11.014)
[tailored behavioral and educational intervention for achieving blood](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.pec.2007.11.014)
[pressure control. Patient Education and Counseling. 2008;70:338-47, doi:](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.pec.2007.11.014)
[10.1016/j.pec.2007.11.014.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.pec.2007.11.014)
8. Rudd P, Miller NH, Kaufman J, Kraemer HC, Bandura A, Geenwald G,

et al. Nurse management for hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17:
921-7.
[9. Wu JYF, Leung WYS, Chang S, Lee B, Zee B, Tong PCY, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136%2Fbmj.38905.447118.2F)

[Effectiveness of telephone counselling by a pharmacist in reducing](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136%2Fbmj.38905.447118.2F)
[mortality in patients receiving polypharmacy: randomised controlled](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136%2Fbmj.38905.447118.2F)
[trial. BMJ. 2006;333:522-7, doi: 10.1136/bmj.38905.447118.2F.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1136%2Fbmj.38905.447118.2F)
[10. Ho PM, Spertus JA, Masoudi FA, Reid KJ, Peterson ED, Magid DJ, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1842)

[Impact of medication therapy discontinuation on mortality after](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1842)
[myocardial infarction. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:1842-7, doi: 10.1001/](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1842)
[archinte.166.17.1842.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1842)
[11. Ho PM, Rumsfeld JS, Masoudi FA, McClure DL, Plomondon ME, Steiner](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1836)

[JF, et al. Effect of medication nonadherence on hospitalization and](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1836)
[mortality among patients with Diabetes Mellitus. Arch Inter Med.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1836)
[2006;166:1836-41, doi: 10.1001/archinte.166.17.1836.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.166.17.1836)
12. Weir MR. The rationale for combination versus single-entity therapy in

hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 1998;11:163S-169S.
[13. Ruzicka M, Leenen FH. Monotherapy versus combination therapy as](http://dx.doi.org/10.2165%2F00003495-200161070-00004)

[first line treatment of uncomplicated arterial hypertension. Drugs.](http://dx.doi.org/10.2165%2F00003495-200161070-00004)
[2001;61:943-54, doi: 10.2165/00003495-200161070-00004.](http://dx.doi.org/10.2165%2F00003495-200161070-00004)
[14. Ekbom T, Linjer E, Hedner T, Lanke J, de Faire U, Wester P-O, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050410014944)

[Cardiovascular events in elderly patients with isolated systolic](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050410014944)
[hypertension. A subgroup analysis of treatment strategies in](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050410014944)
[STOP-Hypertension-2. Blood Press. 2004;13:137-41, doi: 10.1080/](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050410014944)
[08037050410014944.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080%2F08037050410014944)
[15. Poulter NR, Wedel H, Dahlo¨f B, Sever PS, Beevers DG, Caulfield M, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2805%2967186-3)

[Role of blood pressure and other variables in the differential cardiovas-](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2805%2967186-3)
[cular event rates noted in the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2805%2967186-3)
[Trial-Blood Pressure Lowering Arm (ASCOT-BPLA). Lancet.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2805%2967186-3)
[2005;366:907-13, doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67186-3.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2805%2967186-3)
[16. Dahlo¨f B, Devereux RB, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Beevers G, de Faire U, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2802%2908089-3)

[Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Losartan Intervention For](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2802%2908089-3)
[Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a randomised trial](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2802%2908089-3)
[against atenolol. Lancet. 2002;359:995–1003, doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2802%2908089-3)
[08089-3.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2FS0140-6736%2802%2908089-3)
[17. Mano GM, Souza VF, Pierin AM, Lima JC, Ignez EC, Ortega KC, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS0066-782X2002001500006)

[Assessment of the DIXTAL DX-2710 automated oscillometric device for](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS0066-782X2002001500006)
[blood pressure measurement with the validation protocols of the British](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS0066-782X2002001500006)
[Hypertension Society (BHS) and the Association for the Advancement of](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS0066-782X2002001500006)
[Medical Instrumentation (AAMI). Arq Bras Cardiol. 2002;79:601-5, doi:](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS0066-782X2002001500006)
[10.1590/S0066-782X2002001500006.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1590%2FS0066-782X2002001500006)
[18. O’Brien E, Petrie J, Littler WA, de Swiet M, Padfield PL, Altman D, et al.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097%2F00004872-199306000-00013)

[Short report. An outline of the British Hypertension Society Protocol for](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097%2F00004872-199306000-00013)
[the evaluation of blood pressure measuring devices. J Hypertens](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097%2F00004872-199306000-00013)
[1993;11:677-9, doi: 10.1097/00004872-199306000-00013.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097%2F00004872-199306000-00013)
19. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. American

national standart. Eletronic or automated sphygmomanometers, ANSI/
AAMI SP 10-1992. Arlington, VA:AAMI 40,1993.
[20. Osterberg L, Blaschke T. Drug therapy: adherence to medication. NEJM.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1056%2FNEJMra050100)

[2005;353:487-97, doi: 10.1056/NEJMra050100.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1056%2FNEJMra050100)
[21. Horwitz RI, Horwitz SM. Adherence to treatment and health outcomes.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.153.16.1863)

[Arch Intern Med. 1993;153:1863-8, doi: 10.1001/archinte.153.16.1863.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Farchinte.153.16.1863)
[22. Macharia WM, Leon G, Rowe BH, Stephenson BJ, Haynes RB. An](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Fjama.267.13.1813)

[overview of interventions to improve compliance with appointment](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Fjama.267.13.1813)
[keeping for medical services. JAMA. 1992;267:1813-7, doi: 10.1001/jama.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Fjama.267.13.1813)
[267.13.1813.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001%2Fjama.267.13.1813)
[23. Friedman RH. Automated telephone conversations to assess health](http://dx.doi.org/10.1023%2FA%3A1022695119046)

[behavior and deliver behavioral interventions. J Med Syst. 1998;22:95-](http://dx.doi.org/10.1023%2FA%3A1022695119046)
[102, doi: 10.1023/A:1022695119046.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1023%2FA%3A1022695119046)
24. Monane M, Bohn RL, Gurwitz JH, Glynn RJ, Levin R and Avorn J. The

effects of initial drug choice and comorbidity on antihypertensive
therapy compliance: results from a population-based study in the
elderly. Am J Hypertens. 1997;10:697-704.



863


