**Received: 7.1.2011** **Accepted: 13.5.2011**

## _Original Article_ **Comparative evaluation of different values of bispectral index in determination** **of the appropriate level of anesthesia for tracheal intubation during inhalational** **induction of anesthesia in pediatrics**

### _Mohammad Golparvar [1], Reihanak Talakoub [1 ]_ **Abstract**


**BACKGROUND:** Induction of anesthesia is the most crucial period of general anesthesia. Inhalational induction is the
most commonly used technique in pediatric anesthesia. Tracheal intubation can be done after reaching the deep levels
of anesthesia. The depth of anesthesia is often difficult to be judged. Bispectral index is a measure of the effects of anesthesia on brain. This study was designed to evaluate the efficacy of bispectral index (BIS) in clarifying suitable depth of
anesthesia for tracheal intubation during inhalational induction of anesthesia.


**METHODS:** In a clinical trial, ninety patients, ASA I & II, 1 to 6 years old, scheduled for elective surgery were enrolled
into the study. After starting BIS monitoring, patients randomly were divided into three groups. Then, anesthesia was
induced by gradual increase of halothane in 50% mixture of oxygen (O2) and N2O and continued until target BIS (60 ±
2, 50 ± 2 and 40 ± 2) achieved. After tracheal intubation, the duration of laryngoscopy and the presence of laryngospasm, bronchospasm, laryngoscopy failure, the movement of extremities and the changes in SpO2 and BIS were
recorded. The data were analyzed by chi-square and ANOVA at 0.05 level of significance.


**RESULTS:** BIS could not determine the appropriate level of anesthesia for tracheal intubation in this setting. There were
no differences in laryngoscopy duration and the occurrence of laryngospasm, bronchospasm, laryngoscopy failure, extremity movement and awakening time among three groups.


**CONCLUSIONS:** These results confirmed that there was no significant difference in the incidence of complications related to intubation at different BIS values (from 60 to 40) during inhalation induction, and probably to achieve an adequate or more reliable depth of anesthesia, the lower values of BIS is required.


**KEYWORDS:** Inhalation induction, BIS, Pediatric, Anesthesia.

JRMS 2011; 16(5): 770-775

nduction of anesthesia is the most crucial catheter. [3] Intubation of trachea can be made
and stressful period of general anesthesia after reaching the deep levels of anesthesia.
# Ifor the young patient as well as the anes- It is often difficult to judge the depth of an
thesiologist. [1] The consequences of this stressful esthesia. The most reliable signs of adequate
experience by a child become apparent in the depth of anesthesia for tracheal intubation are
immediate postanesthetic period and may per- centrally fixed pupils, flaccidity of arms and
sist for weeks or even longer. [2] Inhalational in- hands, jaw relaxation, apnea and blood presduction of anesthesia by mask is the most sure lower than the preinduction level. [4,5] Miscommonly used technique in pediatric anes- takes in measuring the depth of anesthesia can
thesia in the United States. [3 ] Its reason is the cause serious problems. [6 ]
fact that this technique is relatively easier, Trying to insert tracheal tube into the tramore rapid and less objective for most children chea at low levels of anesthesia can cause
in comparing the insertion of the intravenous bucking, laryngospasm, bronchospasm,


# I



catheter. [3] Intubation of trachea can be made
after reaching the deep levels of anesthesia.
It is often difficult to judge the depth of anesthesia. The most reliable signs of adequate
depth of anesthesia for tracheal intubation are
centrally fixed pupils, flaccidity of arms and
hands, jaw relaxation, apnea and blood pressure lower than the preinduction level. [4,5] Mistakes in measuring the depth of anesthesia can
cause serious problems. [6 ]
Trying to insert tracheal tube into the trachea at low levels of anesthesia can cause
bucking, laryngospasm, bronchospasm,



1- Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine and Anesthesiaology and Critical Care Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
Corresponding Author: Reihanak Talakoub
E-mail: talakoub@med.mui.ac.ir

**770** JRMS/ June 2011; Vol 16, No 6.


Comparative evaluation of different values of Bispectral index Golparvar et al



movement of patient, traumatization of airway
(teeth, palates, tonsils, tonsilar folds, vocal
cords, arytenoid cartilages and ...), prolongation of intubation period, sympathetic stimulation and probably desaturation. [7-9] Moreover,
the delay in intubation can cause overdosage
of inhaled anesthetics and their complications
such as bradycardia, arrhythmia, hypotension
and finally, respiratory arrest and vasomotor
collapse. [10 ]
Guedel (1883-1956) in 1937 described a detailed system to separate various stages of anesthesia depth which was generally accepted. [11]
This classification was designed for use of a
sole inhalational anesthetic agent which was
Ether. Nowadays, because of the use of intravenous induction agents with muscle relaxants
and discontinuation of Ether, Guedel's classification is no longer used in clinical practice and
the depth of anesthesia can be measured by
using BIS monitoring. [11,12 ]
The effects of anesthesia and sedation on
the brain are measured by the Bispectral index
(BIS). Clinicians are allowed to deliver more
précised anesthesia and a better response to
the patient's changing condition during surgery by this new vital “sign”. The BIS index is
a measure of, a new "vital sign". [13-16 ]
The BIS index is a number between 0 and
100. The “awake” clinical state is represented
by a BIS values near 100. While the maximal
electroencephalogram (EEG) effect possible (an
isoelectric EEG) is denoted by a zero value. At
BIS index values less than 40, a greater effect of
the anesthesia on the EEG is signified and at a
BIS index value of less than 60, an extremely
low probability of conciseness is considered.
The maintenance of BIS index number between
40 and 60 signifies adequate hypnotic effect
during general anesthesia.
Induction of anesthesia with inhalational
gases is the most popular method in children
and there is no reliable sign or monitoring to
find an optimal depth of anesthesia for tracheal intubation in this method. In addition,
BIS is a measure of the effects of anesthesia

and sedation on the brain that can be used for
measuring anesthetic depth. [17] We designed



this study to assess the efficacy of BIS in accurate measuring depth of anesthesia during inhalational induction of anesthesia and introducing a suitable level of BIS for safe tracheal
intubation in children.

### **Methods**

After obtaining approval from Institutional
Ethics Committee and informed consent from
each patient's parent, in a clinical trial, ninety
patients, ASA I and II, 1-6 years of age scheduled for elective surgery in Alzahra Hospital
were included in this study in a simple sampling manner. Other inclusion criteria were no
sign of difficult intubation, no signs, symptoms
or history of upper respiratory tract infection
in the past 2 weeks and no contraindication for
use of halothane. All patients were premedicated with midazolam 0.1 mg/kg intravenously and transferred to operating room. Patients who showed adverse reaction to premedication with midazolam were excluded
from this study (18). Routine monitoring of
vital signs (pulse oximetry, capnography, electrocardiography, non-invasive blood pressure
and temperature) was supplemented by additional BIS monitoring (A-2000 BIS monitor;
Aspect Medical Systems, BV, Leiden, The
Netherlands). BIS monitoring was started before receiving intravenous atropine (0.02
mg/kg). Then, they were randomly divided
into three groups according to suggestions of
Randomized Allocation Software (19); group 1
included BIS of 60, group 2 covered BIS of 50
and group 3 involved BIS of 40.
Inhalational anesthesia was induced by
gradual increasing of halothane* with a 50%
mixture of O2 in N2O and continued until target BIS (60 ± 2 for group 1, 50 ± 2 for group 2
and 40 ± 2 for group 3) were achieved. To prevent possible injuries due to inadequate depth
of anesthesia, after achieving the desired level
of BIS, clinical signs of deep anesthesia (relaxation of extremities, rapid shallow respiration,
size and centralization of pupils) were checked
and recorded. Then, tracheal intubation was
done after 3-5 times inspiring 100% O2. After
tracheal intubation, the concentration of halo


JRMS/ June 2011; Vol 16, No 6. **771**


Comparative evaluation of different values of Bispectral index Golparvar et al



thane reduced to 0.8% in a 50% mixture of N2O
and O2. Then, atracurium 0.6 mg/kg were given intravenously and lungs were mechanically
ventilated (tidal volume: 10 mg/kg) to maintain EtCo2 of 30-40 mmHg by regulating suitable respiratory rate. At the end of surgery,
halothane and N2O discontinued and muscle
relaxant was reversed by intravenous mixture
of prostigmin (0.04 mg/kg) and atropine (0.02
mg/kg). Patients were extubated after full
awakening (crying, spontaneous eye opening
and trying for self extubation) and then, transferred to recovery room. BIS values, blood
pressure, pulse rate and SpO2 were measured
and recorded before induction of anesthesia,
before laryngoscopy and immediately after
laryngoscopy. In addition, the amounts of
change of BIS values, pulse rate and SPO2 for
each patient were calculated by decreasing
those values “immediately after laryngoscopy”
from the values “before laryngoscopy” and
then, the mean change of these three data were
used in comparison among three groups (Table
2). Moreover, the time to reach the proposed
BIS index (the time interval between placing
face mask and initiation of inhalational anes
thetics to reach the BIS index of 60, 50 and 40 in
groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively), EtCO2 values
after intubation (mean EtCO2 at first minute
after intubation), laryngoscopy duration (the
time interval between the insertion of the



blade of laryngoscope and taking it out from
the patient’s mouth after a successful intubation), responses to laryngoscopy (laryngospasm, bronchospasm, movement of extremities) and the awakening time (the time
interval between the discontinuation of inhalational gases and endotracheal extubation) were
assessed too.
One way analysis of variance (one way
ANOVA) was used for comparison of age,
weight, BIS values, duration of intubation,
heart rate, Spo2, EtCO2 and awakening time.
Chi-square was used for comparison of gender
and responses to laryngoscopy. Statistical tests
performed with SPSS (version of 17) statistical
software package at 0.05 level of significance.


### change of BIS values, pulse rate and SPO2 for Results

each patient were calculated by decreasing Ninety patients including 25 females and 65
those values “immediately after laryngoscopy” males were enrolled into the study. Mean and
from the values “before laryngoscopy” and standard deviation of age and weight were
then, the mean change of these three data were 2.82±1.25 years and 12.13±2.86 kg, respectively
used in comparison among three groups (Table (P>0.05).
2). Moreover, the time to reach the proposed The mean and SD of age in groups 1 to 3
BIS index (the time interval between placing were 2.77±1.4, 2.53±1.4 and 3.18±0.8, respecface mask and initiation of inhalational anes- tively with the p value of 0.122; and these
thetics to reach the BIS index of 60, 50 and 40 in measures for weight were 12.33±2.6, 11.87±3.4
groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively), EtCO2 values and 12.18±2.6, respectively and the p value for
after intubation (mean EtCO2 at first minute this variable was 0.823.
after intubation), laryngoscopy duration (the The relative distribution of male/female
time interval between the insertion of the ration in groups 1, 2, and 3 were 21/9, 22/8


**Table 1.** Comparison of time to reach to proposed bispectral index (BIS), duration of laryngoscopy, mean changes of BIS, heart rate, arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2), end tidal CO2 (EtCO2)
and an awakening time among three groups.



|Variable|Group1|Group2|Group3|P Value<br>-|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Time to reach the proposed<br>BIS (min)|3.28±0.76|3.71±0.67|4.4±0.67|0.00|
|Mean changes of BIS|-1.6 ±11.57|4.5±7.6|9.1±10.8|0.00|
|Duration of laryngoscopy (min)|7.4±1.0|7.4±1.2|7.2 ±1.4|0.897|
|Mean changes of heart rate<br>(b/min)|7.1±7.7|12.06±9.7|9.0±12.5|0.174|
|Mean changes of SpO2 (%)|-0.83±1.6|-0.10±1.7|0.36±1.9|0.037|
|EtCO2 after intubation (mmHg)|41.06±9.9|43.2±9.4|49.9±10.8|0.174|
|Awakening time (min)|9±1.3|8.5±1.3|8.8±1.6|0.520|


**772** JRMS/ June 2011; Vol 16, No 6.


Comparative evaluation of different values of Bispectral index Golparvar et al


**Table 2.** The frequency distributions of responses to laryngoscopy among three groups


|Laryngospasm|Group1<br>5|Group2<br>6|Group3<br>3|PValue<br>0553<br>.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Bronchospasm|0|1|0|0.364|
|Movement of extremity|7|9|9|0.801|
|Patients with response to laryn-<br>goscopy*|10|10|12|0.824|



*Some patients showed more than one response.

and 22/8, respectively (P = 0.946). There were
no significant differences in laryngoscopy duration, laryngospasm, bronchospasm, laryngoscopy failure, extremity movement, awakening
time among three groups. (p<0.05) (Tables 1
and 2)
In addition to our findings, it was unpredictably seen that groups who had a lower BIS
values (group 2 and 3) showed a significant
increase in BIS values due to the laryngoscopic
stimuli (Table-3).



Our findings showed that although reaching the BIS value of about 40 when compared
to 50 and 60 values required more time, no
significant difference was seen in the incidence
of complications due to inadequate depth of
anesthesia among these three groups.
In this study, in two groups patients
showed a significant difference in BIS changes
due to tracheal intubation; this difference was
greater at the lower BIS value. In other words,
BIS values were increased significantly in the
second and third groups who had BIS values
about 50 and 40, respectively. These results are
consistent with known effects of noxious stimulation on BIS values of patients under general anesthesia. [21]
But, it is not consistent to the findings of
Oda et al. [22] who reported that in youngsters in
the presence of N2O, BIS decreased during la
[20] including lower speed of in- ryngoscopic stimulation (paradoxical reaction).

This difference probably was due to the age of
the selected groups in his study (less than 40
years) comparing with our studied groups
who were much younger.
Instead, this finding is in the same direction
of another study [23] that revealed the painful
stimuli in children (1-6 y), even in the presence
of N2O resulted in elevation of BIS values.
In the present study, HR, SpO2 and EtCO2

**Table 3.** The mean bispectral index (BIS) before and immediately after
intubation in different groups


### **Discussion**

The aim of the present study was to investigate
the efficacy of BIS in evaluating the adequate
anesthetic depth for endotracheal intubation
during induction of inhalational anesthesia in
children. We chose halothane as an inhalation
induction agent because it has some priorities
on sevoflurane [20] including lower speed of induction by halothane and practically it is easier
to keep patient at a special level of anesthesia
depth with less fluctuations in BIS value.
In spite of using BIS monitoring in children
to evaluate anesthesia depth in several studies,
no study has been done to use this monitoring
to find the suitable anesthesia depth for tracheal intubation during inhalational anesthesia
in children.



|MeanofBIS BeforeIntubation|Group1<br>6163±54<br>. .|Group2<br>5053±29<br>. .|Group3<br>3836±76<br>. .|
|---|---|---|---|
|Immediately After|60.03±10|55.06±7.7|47.5±9.9|
|Intubation<br>P value|0.455|0.003|0.000|


JRMS/ June 2011; Vol 16, No 6. **773**


Comparative evaluation of different values of Bispectral index Golparvar et al



were recorded before and after tracheal intubation and there were no significant differences
among the three groups. This finding showed
that although the depth of anesthesia was
enough to eliminate the pressor response, the
BIS values were increased.
Our results further confirmed the inefficacy
of BIS monitoring in detecting the adequate
anesthetic depth for tracheal intubation which
were similar to the findings of Constant and
his colleagues. [24 ]
Constant et al. [24] studied 40 children un
der inhalational induction of anesthesia
with sevoflurane and they concluded that
BIS did not reliably predict the depth of anesthesia during inhalational anesthetic induction. However, van Twest et al. [25] reported that when comparing two different
BIS values (25 and 40), BIS values of about
25 provided a better condition for tracheal
intubation during induction of anesthesia
with sevoflurane.
With regard to the results of the mentioned
studies and the present study, it seems that a
lower level of BIS values is needed to provide
acceptable condition for tracheal intubation

### **Conflict of Interests**


Authors have no conflict of interests.



during inhalation anesthesia induction.
Van Twest et al. also showed that children
who had BIS values about 40 had pressor responses. [25 ]
In any case, the known paradoxical effect
which was explained in the presence of N2O
(laryngoscopic stimulation leading to reduction of BIS) is not confirmed by our findings.
In conclusion, there were no significant difference in the incidence of responses related to
intubation at different BIS values (from 60 to
40) during inhalation anesthesia induction, and
probably to achieve an adequate or more reliable depth of anesthesia, the lower values of
BIS is required.

### **Acknowledgment**

The authors express their appreciation to the
Anesthesiology and Critical Care Research
Center for their assistance with this study.
They also are grateful to the Vice Chancellery
for Research, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences for their financial support.
The Ethical Committee of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences approved this study
(Project number: 18 Center 5012).


### **Authors Contrinution**

MG Primary searches, preparing proposal, producing and providing equipments, collecting data,
statistical analysis, writing manuscript. RK collecting data, writing and translating manuscript. All
authors have read and approved the content of the manuscript

### **References**


**1.** Motoyama E. K, Gronert B. J, Fine G. F: Induction of Anesthesia and Maintenance of the Airway in Infants and
Children in Smith's Anesthesia for infant and Children; Mosby 7th edition 2006; 319
**2.** Mc Cann ME, Kain ZN: The management of preoperative anxiety in children: An update. Anesth Analg 93:98-105, 2001.
**3.** Motoyama E. K, Gronert B. J, Fine G. F: Induction of Anesthesia and Maintenance of the Airway in Infants and
Children in Smith's Anesthesia for infant and Children; Mosby 7th edition 2006; 324
**4.** Motoyama E. K, Gronert B. J, Fine G. F: Induction of Anesthesia and Maintenance of the Airway in Infants and
Children in Smith's Anesthesia for infant and Children; Mosby 7th edition 2006; 341
**5.** Sarner JB, Levine M, Davis PJ, et al.: Clinical charactristics of sevofelorane in children: A comparison with
halothane. Anesthesiology 82:38-46, 1995.
**6.** Gelb A. W, Leslie K, Stanski D. R, Shafer S. L: Monitoring the Depth of Anesthesia in Millers Anesthesia By
Ronald D. Miller; Churchill Livingstone 7th ed. 2009; 1260
**7.** Wittkugel E. P: Pediatric laryngospasm. In Complications in anesthesia by Atlee J. L; Saunders, 2ed edition 2006; 599


**774** JRMS/ June 2011; Vol 16, No 6.


Comparative evaluation of different values of Bispectral index Golparvar et al


**8.** Kong AS, Brennan L, Bingham R, Morgan-Hughes J. An audit of induction of anaesthesis in neonates and small
infants wine pulse oximetw. Anaesthesia 1992;47:896-9
**9.** Rosenblatt W. H.: Airway Management in Clinical Anesthesia by Barash P. 5th edition, Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins 2006: 608

**10.** Gare M, Schwabe DA, Hettrick DA, et al: Desflurane, sevoflurane, and isoflurane affect left atrial active and passive
mechanical properties and impair left atrial–left ventricular coupling in vivo Analysis using pressure-volume
relations. Anesthesiology 2001; 95:689-698.
**11.** Bhargava AK, Setlur R, Sreevastava D. (Jan). "Correlation of bispectral index and Guedel's stages of ether
anesthesia." Anesth Analg. 2004; 98: 132–4
**12.** Schroeck H, Fecho K, Abode K, Bailey A.Vocal cord function and bispectral index in pediatric bronchoscopy
patients emerging from propofol anesthesia. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2010 May;45(5):494-9
**13.** Sigl JC, Chamoun NG. An introduction to bispectral analysis for the electroencephalogram. J Clin Monit. 1994;
10:392-404.
**14.** Rampil IJ. A primer for EEG signals processing in anesthesia. Anesthesiology.1998; 89:980-1002.
**15.** Luginbuhl M, Schnider TW. Detection of awareness with the bispectral index: two case reports. Anesthesiology.
2002; 96:241-3.
**16.** Sammartino M, Volpe B, Sbaraglia F, Garra R, D'Addessi A. Capnography and the bispectral index-their role in
pediatric sedation: a brief review. Int J Pediatr. 2010;2010:828347. Epub 2010 Oct 3.
**17.** Liao WW, Wang JJ, Wu GJ, Kuo CD. The effect of cerebral monitoring on recovery after sevoflurane anesthesia
in ambulatory setting in children: A comparison among bispectral index, A-line autoregressive index, and standard
practice. J Chin Med Assoc. 2011 Jan;74(1):28-36.
**18.** Golparvar M, Saghaei M, Sajedi P, Razavi S.Paradoxical reaction following intravenous midazolam premedication
in pediatric patients – a randomized placebo controlled trial of ketamine for rapid tranquilization:  Pediatric
Anesthesia 2004 14: 924–930
**19.** Saghaei M. Random allocation software for parallel group randomized trials. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2004 Nov
9;4(1):26
**20.** Cote CJ. Pediatric Anesthesia. In: Miller RD, editor. Miller’s anesthesia. 7 [th] ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Churchill
Livingstone; 2009. P. 2567
**21.** Talakoob R, Abbasi S, Saryazdi H, Jahangirfard B, Masoodifar M. Bispectral index response to cricoid pressure
during induction of general anesthesia: Journal of research in Medical Sciences; 2011 jan: 63-67
**22.** Oda Y, Tanaka K, Matsuura T, Hase I, Nishikawa K, Asada A. Nitrous oxide induces paradoxical
electroencephalographic changes after tracheal intubation during isoflurane and sevoflurane anesthesia. Anesth
Analg. 2006 Apr;102(4):1094-102
**23.** Golparvar M, Koosha A. Dose N2O Cause Paradoxical Reaction in Response to Noxious Stimulants During
Inhalation Induction of Anesthesia in Pediatrics?: 2009 Aug: 283-290
**24.** Constant I, Dubois MC, Piat V, Moutard ML, McCue M, Murat IChanges in electroencephalogram and autonomic
cardiovascular activity during induction of anesthesia with sevoflurane compared with halothane in children.
Anesthesiology. 1999 Dec;91(6):1604-15
**25.** Van Twest RM. Bispectral index guided timing of intubation without neuromuscular blockade during sevoflurane
induction of anaesthesia in adults. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2006 Oct; 34(5):606-12.


JRMS/ June 2011; Vol 16, No 6. **775**


