**Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology** **Dovepress**

open access to scientific and medical research



Open Access Full Text Article



O r i g i n a l R e s e a r c h


# A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cream clinical trial evaluating Dermytol [®] for the treatment of actinic keratoses

This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology
7 August 2014


Number of times this article has been viewed



Malkanthi Evans [1]


Douglas Kalman [2]

Patricia Alvarez [3]


Maryse Paquet [4]

Najla Guthrie [1]


1KGK Synergize Inc., London, ON,
Canada; [2] Miami Research Associates,
South Miami, FL, USA; [3] Latin American
Research, Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic; [4] Department of Medicine,
Western University, London, ON,
Canada


Correspondence: Malkanthi Evans
KGK Synergize Inc., 255 Queens Avenue,
London, ON N6A 5R8, Canada

Tel + 1 519 438 9374 ext 239

Fax + 1 519 438 8314
[Email mevans@kgksynergize.com](mailto:mevans@kgksynergize.com)



**Purpose:** Actinic keratosis lesions (AKs) have the potential to develop into squamous cell

carcinoma (SCC) and thus therapies to prevent SCC development from AKs are warranted.

The aim of this study was to assess the effects of a 3 month application of a canola phenolic

acid-based cream (CPA) on AK lesions.

**Patients and methods:** This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 12 week
clinical study conducted at a single-center in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. Forty-five

subjects (30 CPA and 15 placebo), aged 45–85 years with 3–10 AKs within a 20 cm [2] treatment

area (scalp, forehead, dorsal forearm, neck, or back of hand) were enrolled. The primary outcome

was complete or partial lesion clearance and the secondary outcome was safety of CPA.
**Results:** Although complete AK lesion clearance was not seen in this study, a significant reduction

in the mean change from baseline in the average lesion area was observed at weeks 3 ( _P_ =0.002),

6 ( _P_,0.001), and 12 ( _P_,0.001) in the CPA group, but only at weeks 6 and 12 in the placebo

group ( _P_ =0.005 and _P_ =0.002, respectively). Furthermore, the proportion of participants with a
$10% decrease in average lesion area was significantly higher in the CPA group than the placebo

group at weeks 3 ( _P_ =0.05) and 6 ( _P_ =0.02), and showed a trend at week 12 ( _P_ =0.06). A subset

analysis of the change in average lesion area based upon the total lesion area at baseline revealed

that CPA elicited a greater reduction than placebo (2×) in participants with a baseline total AK

lesion area of 100–500 mm [2] than in participants with a total area,100 mm [2] (1.3×).

**Conclusion:** The results of this study and previous in vitro studies suggest a potential role for

CPA in the treatment of AK lesions and the prevention of SCC development.

**Keywords:** actinic keratosis, precancerous lesion, canola phenolic acid-rich extract, squamous

cell carcinoma, Dermytol [®]

## **Introduction**


Actinic keratoses (AKs), also referred to as solar keratoses, are lesions of keratinocytic

dysplasias that arise from ultraviolet (UV)-induced changes to the skin. Chronically

sun-exposed areas such as the face, ears, neck, forearms, and dorsal hands are most
commonly affected. [1] AKs are inflamed lesions characterized by erythema associated
with scaling. [2] In the US, 55% of adults aged 65 to 75 years have AKs, making them
one of the most commonly treated dermatological conditions. [3,4] Advanced age, fair

skin, and living at lower latitudes are independent risk factors that increase the preva­

lence of AKs. [5]


AKs are precancerous epidermal lesions and patients presenting with AKs have

been found to be 6× more likely to develop melanoma and non-melanoma skin can­
cer. [6] The progression of AKs to invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has been












Evans et al


reported to be quite variable and occurs at a rate of 0.096%

to 16% per lesion each year; however, AKs tend to present

as multiple lesions and a given patient has an average of 6 to
8 lesions. [4,7,8] The 10 year risk factor for AKs to progress to

SCC is an estimated 6.1% to 10.2% for an individual with an

average of 7.7 lesions. [4] While the risk of progression is low,

60% to 97% of SCCs are considered to have developed from
AKs, [9] and with a 1% mortality rate, development of effective

therapies that resolve AKs or cease their transformation into

SCC is warranted. [10]


Current treatment options for AKs consist of lesion- or
field-directed therapies. Lesion-directed therapies include

cryosurgery, photodynamic therapies and curettage with
electrodessication. [5] Cryosurgery is the most commonly used

treatment for AKs, however this treatment may be contrain­

dicated if the diagnosis is uncertain. A decreased treatment

response is expected for thicker lesions or lesions located on
the dorsal hand. [11] Photodynamic therapies administered in

combination with photosensitizers such as methyl-aminole­
vulinic acid are superior to placebo. [12,13] Effective treatment

of larger lesions may involve surgery to shave or curette the

AK lesions. Lesion-directed therapies are most appropriate
for the relief of bleeding and aesthetic improvement. [14]


Field-directed therapies are most appropriate for cancer
prevention as they are used on areas with significant sun
damage that are potential sites for the development of AKs. [14]
The application of 5-fluorouracil or diclofenac cream is a less
invasive form of treatment, however, inflammatory changes,

such as erythema, necrosis, blistering, and erosion are com­
mon and are not well-tolerated. [15] A recent meta-analysis of

eight interventions for AKs determined that for complete
clearance of lesions, 5-fluorouracil was the most effective
treatment, with other field-directed therapies, such as imiqui­

mod and ingenol mebutate, along with lesion-directed pho­
todynamic therapy being somewhat effective, [14] and topical
retinoids and dermabrasion being of limited effectiveness. [16,17]

While surgery is the most commonly used treatment ­strategy,

it is not the most effective. Surgery is highly invasive, causes

pain, and may result in scarring. The increased risk of adverse

events (AEs) associated with pharmaceutical and photo­

therapies necessitates the development of a highly effective,

non-invasive therapy for the treatment of AKs.


Canola phenolic acid-based cream (CPA) is rich in sinapic

acid (.50%) and possesses anti-proliferative activity. The

anti-proliferative properties of CPA are more potent and

longer lasting when compared to pure sinapic acid in vitro,

using B16-F1 cells (unpublished data). CPA has demonstrated

anti-proliferative activity both in vitro and in vivo as it has



**Dovepress**


been shown to significantly decrease tumor multiplicity and

total tumor weight in an inducible non-melanoma skin cancer

mouse model and reduce melanoma tumor cell growth in
male mice. [18,19] Orally-treated mice subcutaneously injected

with B16-F1 malignant melanoma tumor cells, demonstrated

an average 44.5% decrease of tumor volume while tumor
volume was decreased by 61.2% in topically-treated mice. [19]

CPA also reduced the occurrence of colonic polyps in a rat
model of colon carcinogenesis. [20] Therefore, the purpose of
this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of a 3 month

administration of 7.8% CPA on the complete or partial clear­

ance of AK lesions.

## **Materials and methods** Study design

This was a single-center, randomized, double-blind,

­placebo-controlled, 12 week clinical trial conducted by

Miami Research Associates (MRA; South Miami, FL, USA)

in collaboration with Latin American Research at an MRA

site in the Dominican Republic (Santo Domingo, Dominican

Republic). Ethical approval for this study was obtained from

the Institutional Review Board (Consejo Nacional de Bioética

en Salud, CONABIOS, Santo Domingo) on December 12,

2007. The study was conducted in accordance with the

Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent amendments.

Informed consent was obtained from each subject at the
screening visit prior to any study-related activities. The first
screening visit of the first subject was performed on June 18,

2008 and the last visit of the last participant took place on

January 6, 2009.

## Participants

Male and female subjects between 45 and 85 years of age with

3 to 10 AK lesions in a treatment area (scalp, forehead, dorsal
forearm, neck, back of the hand) not exceeding 20 cm [2] in

total area were eligible for this study. Subjects were excluded

if they were pregnant, breastfeeding, or planning on becom­

ing pregnant during the course of the trial, had a history of

alcohol or drug abuse within the past year, were living with

someone being treated with imiquimod, had known allergies

or sensitivities to components of the vehicle cream, or had

cardiovascular, hematological, hepatic, renal, endocrine,

vascular or gastrointestinal abnormalities or diseases, or

any other conditions which may have adversely affected

their ability to complete the study. Prior to randomization,

a washout period of 4 weeks was required for interferon

inducers, immunomodulators, immunosuppressants, cyto­

toxic drugs, or investigational drugs and a washout period of



**216**



**submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7

**Dovepress**


**Dovepress**


2 weeks was required for topical therapies. The use of other

natural health products or vitamin D supplements required

a washout of 3 weeks prior to baseline. Subjects diagnosed

with a bacterial or viral infection less than 2 weeks prior to

randomization were also excluded.

## Randomization and blinding

Study participants were randomized to receive the active

product CPA or placebo in a 2:1 proportion using a block-3

randomization scheme. The study product was packaged in

the form of single-application squeeze sachets containing

either CPA or placebo. A four-digit randomization code was

applied to each sachet and a randomization schedule was

prepared showing the correspondence between the product

and randomization code. Study participants, clinical staff,

and assessors were all blinded to treatment allocation.

## Investigational product

The investigational product, Dermytol [®] (KGK Synergize

Inc., London, ON, Canada) (CPA) is a phytonutrient extract

rich in phenolic acids isolated from defatted canola meal

(a residual fraction obtained during the processing of canola
oil; Grain Processing Corp., Muscatine, IA, USA). The final

product, a brown powder rich in sinapic acid (.50%) is the
principal active ingredient in Dermytol [®] (CBI Laboratories,

Inc., Fort Worth, Texas, USA). The powder was mixed into

a hydrophilic cream base producing a 7.8% cream for der­

matological use. CPA contains 30% maltodextrin which acts

as an inert excipient during the manufacturing process. The

placebo cream was made using the same formulation but

without the active ingredient.

## Study protocol

At screening, informed consent was obtained and the medical

history, height, weight, and vital signs of the subjects were

recorded. Blood samples were taken for routine laboratory

tests. The study dermatologists performed a lesion evaluation

and selected three to ten visible AK lesions within an area

less than 20 cm [2] to be measured throughout the study. At the

randomization visit (baseline), concomitant therapies were

reviewed, a physical examination was performed and weight

and vital signs were recorded. Lesions were evaluated and
were also photographed. Study lesions were classified as

mild, moderate or severe at baseline by the investigational

­dermatologist. Lesion severity was monitored and docu­

mented at week 3, 6, 12, and 36. A 6 week supply of CPA

or placebo was dispensed along with application instructions

and AE recording forms to monitor product use. Participants



Efficacy of Dermytol [®] on actinic keratosis


were instructed to apply the content of one sachet of cream on

the preselected skin area twice a day, after showering in the

morning and again in the evening for 12 weeks. At the week 3,
6, and 12 visits, AK lesions were evaluated and classified,

photographed, AE forms collected, the incidence and severity

of erythema, edema, induration, vesicles, erosion, ulceration,

excoriation, and scabbing were graded, and ­systemic reac­

tions were assessed. Participants who experienced any severe

adverse reactions were allowed rest periods of up to 2 weeks

in which the frequency of application was reduced to once

per day. Participants who discontinued treatment were not

replaced. Blood samples were taken for routine laboratory

safety tests at the week 12 visit. At the follow-up end of treat­

ment visit (6 months post-treatment), the lesion areas in the

CPA group were again photographed and assessed.

## Sample size estimation

The minimum number of participants needed for statistical
significance was based on previously published studies. [21–23]

With projected clearance rates of 70% for treatment and 8% for

placebo, approximately 24 treatment and 12 placebo partici­
pants were needed to provide 95% power to detect a significant

difference in complete clearance rates. Based on an expected

20% dropout rate, approximately 45 subjects were required to

initiate the study if 36 were expected to complete the study.

## Outcomes


The primary objective of this study was to evaluate whether

CPA promoted complete or partial clearance of AK lesions.
Complete clearance was defined as an area of inflamed skin
that no longer had signs of inflammation and appeared simi­
lar to the surrounding skin. Partial clearance was defined
as a reduction in the quantity (defined as mild, moderate

or severe and a measurement was provided for the lesion

description) and quality (induration, erythematic, scaling,
telangiectasia and hemorrhagic zones) of inflammation

characteristics. An investigating dermatologist calculated

the area of individual lesions by multiplying the maxi­

mum length by the width and provided an assessment of

AK lesion improvement; “complete resolution”, “partial

resolution”, “no change”, or “worsening”. Two categorical

measures of improvement, mean change and percentage

change in lesion size at various visits were tabulated and

the two groups compared.


As no participants achieved complete lesion clear­

ance, an overall numerical measure of improvement was

developed by assigning values of +2, +1, 0, and -1 to the

investigator’s assessment of lesion improvement, as being



Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7 **submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com

**Dovepress**



**217**


Evans et al


“completely resolved”, “partially resolved”, “unchanged”,

or “worse”, respectively. These values were averaged

and compared between products in the same way as other

numerical endpoints. In addition, two categorical measures

of improvement, average change, and percentage change in

lesion size (.10% decrease, .25% decrease, and .50%

decrease) at various visits, were tabulated and the two

groups compared.


The total lesion area was dependent on the number and

area of the individual lesions and as there was a large varia­

tion in the number and area of lesions at baseline (total lesion
area ranged from 13 mm [2] to 840 mm [2] ), average lesion area

produced a more accurate assessment of response to treat­

ment and was calculated by multiplying the maximum length

by the width of individual lesions. The following explor­

atory analyses were also performed: 1) a subset analysis

of reduction in average lesion area based on baseline total
lesion area (,100 mm [2], 101–250 mm [2], and 251–500 mm [2] );

2) prevalence of scabbing; and 3) the effect of lesion age on

response to treatment.

## Statistical analyses

The analytical population consisted of all participants who

completed the 12 week treatment period within each study

arm, with no protocol violations that in the judgment of the
principal investigator would have rendered their efficacy

data unreliable, and who were suitably compliant (80% to

120% overall) with the dosing regimen. The mean changes

in lesion clearance from baseline and between CPA- and
placebo-treated groups were tested for significance with

a paired Student’s _t_ -test or the non-parametric Wilcoxon

signed-rank test as appropriate. Data were log-transformed

prior to statistical analysis to improve normality of the lesion

measurement data.


The safety population, consisted of all participants who

received at least one application of study product and who

had any subsequent safety evaluations. Mean changes in
safety variables from baseline were tested for significance

by the paired Student’s _t_ -test or by the non-parametric

Wilcoxon signed-rank test as appropriate. Between-product

differences in mean changes from baseline were tested for
significance by the unpaired Student’s _t_ -test or by the non
parametric Mann–Whitney _U_ test as appropriate. AEs were

listed, MedDRA-coded, and grouped by system organ class

(cardiac, gastrointestinal, neurologic, etc). The proportion of

participants experiencing one or more AEs in each ­MedDRA

system organ class was compared between products by

Fisher’s exact test.



**Dovepress**

## **Results** Participant disposition

Forty-five eligible subjects (four male and 41 female) were

randomized and 42 completed the study (Figure 1). Three

of the 45 participants did not complete the entire treatment

= =
period because of loss to follow-up (N 1) or AEs (N 2)

­(Figure 1). All enrolled participants were white Hispanic

except for one participant of Asian ethnicity. Participants

ranged from 45 to 82 years of age and the mean age of

those on CPA was 60.0±10.8 years and those on placebo

55.7±9.1 years (Table 1). All study participants had mild AK

lesions and two participants in the CPA group had two moder­

ate lesions along with mild lesions. There was no difference

in body mass index, average AK lesion area or total lesion

area between the treatment groups at baseline (Table 1).

## Efficacy of CPA

Although none of the study participants achieved complete

clearance, decreases in average lesion area were seen with

both CPA and placebo treatment (Figure 2). The CPA group

showed almost twice the decrease in lesion size as the placebo
group (Figure 3). The reduction was significant for both CPA

and placebo groups at 6 ( _P_,0.001 and _P_ =0.005, respectively)

and 12 weeks ( _P_,0.001 and _P_ =0.002, respectively), but only
significant in the CPA group at 3 weeks ( _P_ =0.002). The dif­

ference in the week 6 change between the CPA and placebo
groups approached statistical significance ( _P_ =0.09). There

was a decrease in average lesion area from week 12 to week 36

(post-treatment) in the CPA group (week 36 assessment

was not performed in the placebo group), indicating that the

improvement in the CPA group persisted beyond the treatment

period (Figures 2 and 3). In the two participants with moderate

lesions in the CPA group, lesions decreased to mild in severity

at week 6, week 12, and follow-up at week 36.


A greater proportion of participants in the CPA group than

the placebo group showed a .10% decrease in average lesion

size at week 3 ( _P_ =0.05) and week 6 ( _P_ =0.02) and showed
a trend toward significance at week 12 ( _P_ =0.06) (Figure 4).

No difference was seen between the groups in the proportion

of participants with .25% reduction in the average lesion

size, but .50% reductions were observed only in the CPA

group (Figure 4).


Subset analyses based upon the baseline total lesion
area (,100 mm [2], 100–249 mm [2] and 250–499 mm [2] ) showed

differences in treatment response within certain total lesion

size groups. Participants in the CPA group with a total lesion
area,100 mm [2] demonstrated a 1.3× greater mean reduc­

tion in average lesion size than placebo (data not shown).



**218**



**submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7

**Dovepress**


**Dovepress**



Efficacy of Dermytol [®] on actinic keratosis

































Total number of participants included in analysis of efficacy: N=42
Total number of participants included in the analysis of safety and tolerability: N=45


**Figure 1** Illustration of the disposition of all participants screened and enrolled into the study.
**Abbreviations:** AE, adverse effect; CPA, canola phenolic acid-based cream.



Similarly, greater responses were observed for participants

in the CPA group compared to placebo for total lesion
areas 101–250 mm [2] (1.9× reduction) and 251–500 mm [2]

(2.0× reduction). The CPA group showed a trend toward

higher prevalence of lesion scabbing, a sign of healing, after

12 weeks of treatment (6.8%) than those treated with placebo

(1.3%, _P_ =0.09). An analysis of lesion age on responsiveness

to treatment suggests that CPA and placebo had comparable

reductions in the average lesion area. Although these differ­
ences were not statistically significant, the number of years
since lesion onset was found to influence the extent of lesion

resolution. Average lesion area was examined for partici­

pants with lesion onset of #5 years, 5–10 years, #10 years,

and .10 years. Greater reductions in lesion size were seen


Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7



in the CPA group than the placebo group for all subsets and

was found to be more pronounced in participants with lesion

onset #10 years compared to those with onset .10 years

(data not shown).

## Safety analysis

One serious adverse event, a parasitic amoeba infection was

reported during this study in a participant receiving placebo.

A total of 56 AEs (45 CPA, eleven placebo) were reported

in 30 (20 CPA, ten placebo) out of the 45 participants in the

safety population (30 CPA, 15 placebo). There were ten events

(nine CPA, one placebo) among four participants (three CPA,

one placebo) that were judged by the principal investigator

to be probably or possibly related to the study product. Of



**submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com


**Dovepress**



**219**


Evans et al


**Table 1** Baseline demographics of study participants






















|Characteristic|Placebo(N=15)|CPA(N=30)|P -value|
|---|---|---|---|
|Age (years)|55.7±9.1|60.0±10.8|0.21|
||52 (45–79)|58 (48–82)||
|Sex||||
|Female<br> Male|14 (93%)<br>1 (7%)|27 (90%)<br>3 (10%)|1.00|
|Race||||
|Asian|0 (0%)|1 (3%)|1.00|
|White<br>Ethnicity<br> Hispanic|15 (100%)<br>15 (100%)|29 (97%)<br>30 (100%)||
|Height (cm)|158.4±5.9|156.7±5.9|0.43|
|Weight (kg)<br>Body mass|157 (151–172)<br>66.4±8.2<br>70 (51–80)<br>26.5±3.1|156 (141–174)<br>67.3±11.3<br>66 (39–98)<br>27.3±3.4|0.79<br>0.44|
|index (kg/m2)|26.9 (20.4–32.5)|27.1 (19.6–34.5)||
|Total lesion<br>area (mm2)|N=15<br>119±85<br>108 (14–302)<br>95% CI: 72–166|N=27<br>121±162<br>64 (13–840)<br>95% CI: 72–166|0.42|
|Average lesion|N=15|N=27|0.64|
|area (mm2)|27±24|21±19||
||11 (3–280)<br>95% CI: 6–48|17 (4–75)<br>95% CI: 11–31||



**Note:** Results are presented as mean ± standard deviation and median (minimum –
maximum).
**Abbreviations:** CI, confidence interval; CPA, canola phenolic acid-based cream.















**Figure 2** Forearm AK lesions.
**Note:** Forearm AK lesions of a participant in the CPA group at ( **A** ) baseline and ( **B** )
end of study (12 weeks of treatment).
**Abbreviations:** AK, Actinic keratosis lesion; CPA, canola phenolic acid-based cream.



**Dovepress**


these, five were skin-related, and the other five were eye,

gastrointestinal, general, immune, and vascular disorders.

The skin-related disorders occurred in three participants,

two in the CPA group, and one in the placebo group. This
difference was not statistically significant.

Blood pressure was significantly reduced compared to

baseline by a mean of 7.8 mmHg for systolic blood pres­

sure ( _P_ =0.01) and a mean of 4.7 mmHg for diastolic blood

pressure ( _P_,0.001) after 6 weeks of treatment with CPA.
These changes were not clinically significant. No between
group differences were noted for heart rate, blood pressure

or safety laboratory parameters with the exception of sodium

concentration and red blood cell count. Sodium and red
blood cell count were both significantly decreased in the

CPA group as compared to the placebo group ( _P_ =0.02 and

_P_ =0.03, respectively). However, these changes were of small

magnitude and not clinically important. No safety concerns

were raised throughout the course of this study.

## **Discussion**


The annual direct cost of AK management in the US was esti­
mated in 2004 to be $1.2 billion, with indirect costs ­totaling
$295 million. These costs stand to increase as the baby

boomer generation matures. Common forms of treatment for

AKs include prophylaxis (ie, reducing solar ­exposure), lesion
elimination, and preventative maintenance. [24] ­Development of
field-directed treatments for AK with less adverse side effects

may reduce both the treatment and indirect costs of AK

management and lower the risk of skin cancer. The current
study investigated the efficacy and safety of an alternative

treatment for AKs, CPA, in a population of immunocompe­

tent AK patients.


Although complete clearance was not achieved, par­

ticipants treated with CPA showed a greater decrease in the

average AK lesion area than those treated with placebo. This
difference was not statistically significant, likely due in part

to the reduction in the average area of lesions in the placebotreated group and to an insufficient sample size. Twenty-five

percent of AK lesions spontaneously regress without active

treatment, accounting for the placebo effect observed in this

study and strengthening the case for conservative treatment
of AKs. [2] Marks et al followed subjects with AK lesions who

were not provided with treatment, for 12 months, and reported

that some AKs were self-resolving as a result of the innate

immune response triggered by the lesions. AK lesions have

a risk of recurrence, however, whether ­recurrence may be
prevented by preventative treatment is yet to be determined. [2]

The immune response to AK lesions has been documented


Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7



**220**



**submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com


**Dovepress**


**Dovepress**



4


2


0


−2


−4


−6


−8



Efficacy of Dermytol [®] on actinic keratosis







−10

**Treatment week**


**Figure 3** The mean change in lesion size from baseline at 3, 6 and 12 weeks of treatment and after follow-up at 36 weeks.
**Notes:** A significantly larger decrease in the mean change ( ± 95% confidence interval) in average AK lesion area was seen in both CPA (grey bars) and placebo groups (white
bars) at 6 and 12 weeks, but only in the CPA at 3 weeks. No difference was seen between the treatment groups. The results at week 36, represent the change in the lesion
area from week 12, suggesting that CPA has long-lasting effects beyond the treatment period. * _P_ = 0.002, ** _P_, 0.001 and [†] _P_ = 0.005 as compared to baseline.
**Abbreviations:** AK, Actinic keratosis lesion; CPA, canola phenolic acid-based cream.



histologically to be an inflammatory response that may be
fairly dense, comprised mainly of lymphocytes and plasma. [25]
If the immune response is sufficient, the lesions regress

and spontaneous remission may occur. The percentage of

participants experiencing a .10% reduction in average
lesion area was significantly greater with CPA than placebo
at 3 and 6 weeks and showed a trend toward significance at

12 weeks. This suggests that CPA induces regression of AK

lesions beyond what occurs spontaneously. Moreover, the

sustained reduction of average lesion area in the ­CPA-treated



participants at 36 weeks further supports the efficacy of the

treatment.


Although complete AK clearance was not achieved

during this study, participants treated with CPA showed a

greater decrease in the average AK lesion area than those

treated with placebo. This observation is crucial due to the

association between lesion size and SCC development. Two

histological studies demonstrated that AK progression to
SCC is not a rare event. [26,27] Ehrig et al biopsied 220 AK

lesions and Carag et al 69 AK lesions, and reported 3.2%



80


70



>10% >25% >50%

§§ ¥





60


50


40


30


20


10


0


3 6 12 3 6 12 3 6 12


**Post-treatment week**


**Figure 4** Proportion of subjects exhibiting . 10%, . 25% and . 50% reductions in average lesion size.
**Notes:** A greater proportion of subjects had a . 10% resolution in average lesion size in the CPA group (gray bars) than the placebo group (white bars). [§] _P_ = 0.05, [§§] _P_, 0.05,

¥ _P_ = 0.06 as compared to the placebo group.



**221**



Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7



**submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com


**Dovepress**


Evans et al


and 13% of these lesions to be SCC in situ, while 1.4%

and 3% of lesions were invasive SCC. [26,27] The higher rate

reported by Carag et al was attributed to the fact that larger

lesions were biopsied in their study. AK lesions with a

diameter greater than 1 cm and rapid enlargement has
been associated with increased risk of SCC. [28] ­Additionally,

Cook et al reported an association between changes in
lesion size and SCC. [29] Therefore, the greater reduction in

AK lesion area observed in the CPA group in this study is

promising.


The sustained reduction of average lesion area in the CPA
treated participants at 36 weeks suggests a long term effect

of CPA. It is possible that a longer treatment period (greater

than 12 weeks) may be necessary to achieve resolution of

AK lesions with CPA.

Average lesion area was identified as the most accurate

measure of a treatment effect as there was high variability

between participants in the baseline values of the number and
total area of lesions. When stratified by baseline lesion size
(,100 mm [2], 100–249 mm [2], 250–499 mm [2] ), CPA displayed

a 1.3, 1.9, and 2.0× greater reduction in average lesion size

than the placebo cream. A subset analysis revealed that treat­

ment was more effective in decreasing the size of younger

(,10 years since onset) than older (.10 years since onset)
AK lesions. The implication of this finding is unclear, as

little is known about the characteristics of the AK lesions

that are more susceptible to develop into SCC; therefore it
is difficult to predict which lesions will become invasive. [4,30]

Also, spontaneous resolution of younger lesions may have

confounded the effectiveness of CPA.


Future studies may consider larger sample sizes that permit

more extensive analyses (ie, baseline total lesion area $250
mm [2] and,500 mm [2] ). The difficulty in distinguishing the

effects of treatment on less prominent or preclinical lesions

due to spontaneous regression could potentially be overcome

by stratifying the study population. Furthermore, as CPA is
a field-directed treatment, suppressing the development of

satellite lesions is an important aspect of preventative therapy

that was not investigated in this study. By monitoring the
appearance of new lesions, another measure of efficacy may

be captured. Interestingly, all but one of the CPA-treated

lesions that underwent an observable change in area were

located on the participants’ arms, suggesting that skin loca­
tion may play a role in treatment efficacy. Although a recent
Cochrane review showed differential efficacy dependent
upon skin location, [31] it is unclear whether there is a general

effect. Future studies should include a subset analysis of the

relevance of lesion location.



**Dovepress**


Dosing studies may also be warranted for future

investigations of CPA. The dose of 7.8% CPA was derived

from a previous animal study of 6% CPA with the inclusion

of a 1.8% increase to account for dilution by excipients.

However, cutaneous absorption of drugs delivered through
creams may be lower in man than in mice. [32] One of the great­

est obstacles to topical treatment is the absorption of the

active ingredient through the stratum corneum; which can
vary greatly with the vehicle used for delivery. [33] Two similar

phenolic acids that are used in photo-protective creams have
been shown to readily permeate human skin. [34] Although it
has not been investigated, a similar absorption profile may

exist with CPA and an increased dose may increase the

effectiveness of treatment while still maintaining a safety
profile devoid of the dermatological side effects associated

with current topical treatments.

Chronic skin inflammation and oxidative stress from UV
exposure are directly involved in the pathogenesis of SCC. [35,36]
During chronic inflammation free radicals and aldehydes are

produced which induce gene mutations and post-translational
modifications of key cancer-related proteins. [37] UV radia­

tion alters enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants in the

human skin thereby affecting the antioxidant defense of
various skin layers. [38–40] An antioxidant superoxide dismutase

has been reported to protect human keratinocytes against
UVB-induced injury. [41,42]


Sinapic acid possesses potent anti-oxidative activity,

scavenges free radicals, and protects against neuron and
hepatocyte cell death in vivo. [43,44] A recent study demon­

strated that subcutaneous injections of sinapic acid sig­
nificantly reduced the occurrence of colonic polyps in the
1,2-dimethylhydrazine rat model of colon carcinogenesis. [20]

Other studies have shown that sinapic acid possesses antiinflammatory properties and reduces expression of proinflammatory cytokines. [45] Together the anti-inflammatory

and free radical scavenging properties have been shown to
reduce the extent of fibrosis in a rat model of chronic liver
injury by decreasing the expression of fibrosis-related fac­

tors such as α-smooth muscle actin and transforming growth
factor-β1. [46] It is possible that CPA resolves AK lesions

through a combined mechanism: scavenging free radicals

induced by sun damage, reducing the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, and reducing the expression of
fibrosis-related factors. These mechanisms may allow CPA

to be used in conjunction with other pharmaceutical treat­

ments and to itself act both as a treatment for established

lesions and to prevent the progression of preclinical lesions
in the surrounding skin field.



**222**



**submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7

**Dovepress**


**Dovepress**

## **Conclusion**


AK lesion size is associated with increased risk of SCC.

Results from the current study show that CPA effectively

reduces lesion size in mild AK; therefore, CPA holds poten­
tial as an alternative field-directed therapy for AKs. CPA

may be most appropriate as a prophylactic treatment for

skin chronically exposed to the sun. Concomitant use with

other therapies is a novel avenue for study as CPA has antiinflammatory and anti-oxidative properties and may reduce

the need for use of aggressive synthetically-derived products.

Future dosing studies and larger clinical trials are required to
further establish the efficacy of this alternative treatment.

## **Acknowledgments**

We would like to thank the participants of this study for

their willingness and diligence in complying with the study

­protocol. This study was conducted by Miami Research

Associates under the supervision of the medical director

and co-author, Patricia Alvarez, MD and dermatologists Ana

Gonzalez, MD, Rosa Rojas, MD of Latin ­American Research

(Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic) and Marisela Fernan­

dez, MD and Idelina Sanchez, MD of Clinica Dermatologica

de Herrera (Santo Domingo). This study was supported by

KGK Synergize Inc. (London, ON, Canada). We acknowl­

edge the technical contributions of Josh Baisley, and thank

Nicole Jackson and Andrew Charrette for their editorial

contributions and also thank Hui Jun Chew for reviewing
and editing the final manuscript.

## **Disclosure**


ME and NG are employees of KGK Synergize, Inc. DK, PA,
and MP have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

## **References**


1. Marks R. Solar keratoses. _Br J Dermatol_ . 1990;122 Suppl 35:49–54.
2. Marks R, Foley P, Goodman G, Hage BH, Selwood TS. Spontaneous

remission of solar keratoses: the case for conservative management.
_Br J Dermatol_ . 1986;115(6):649–655.
3. Neidecker MV, Davis-Ajami ML, Balkrishnan R, Feldman SR.

­Pharmacoeconomic considerations in treating actinic keratosis.
­ _Pharmacoeconomics_ . 2009;27(6):451–464.
4. Feldman SR, Fleischer AB Jr. Progression of actinic keratosis to

squamous cell carcinoma revisited: Clinical and treatment implications.
_Cutis_ . 2011;87(4):201–207.
5. Martin G, Swanson N. Clinical findings using ingenol mebutate gel to treat

actinic keratoses. _J Am Acad Dermatol_ . 2013;68(1 Suppl 1):S39–S48.
6. Chen GJ, Feldman SR, Williford PM, et al. Clinical diagnosis of actinic

keratosis identifies an elderly population at high risk of developing skin
cancer. _Dermatol Surg_ . 2005;31(1):43–47.
7. Glogau RG. The risk of progression to invasive disease. _J Am Acad_

_Dermatol_ . 2000;42(1 Pt 2):23–24.
8. Marks R, Rennie G, Selwood TS. Malignant transformation of solar

keratoses to squamous cell carcinoma. _Lancet_ . 1988;1(8589):795–797.



Efficacy of Dermytol [®] on actinic keratosis


9. Ceilley RI, Jorizzo JL. Current issues in the management of actinic

keratosis. _J Am Acad Dermatol_ . 2013;68(1 Suppl 1):S28–S38.
10. Einspahr JG, Stratton SP, Bowden GT, Alberts DS. Chemoprevention

of human skin cancer. _Crit Rev Oncol Hematol_ . 2002;41(3):269–285.
11. Jeffes EWB 3rd, Tang EH. Actinic keratosis: Current treatment options.

_Am J Clin Dermatol_ . 2000;1(3):167–179.
12. Jeffes EW, McCullough JL, Weinstein GD, et al. Photodynamic therapy

of actinic keratosis with topical 5-aminolevulinic acid: A pilot doseranging study. _Arch Dermatol_ . 1997;133(6):727–732.
13. Szeimies RM, Karrer S, Radakovic-Fijan S, et al. Photodynamic therapy

using topical methyl 5-aminolevulinate compared with cryotherapy
for actinic keratosis: A prospective, randomized study. _J Am Acad_
_Dermatol_ . 2002;47(2):258–262.
14. Gupta AK, Paquet M. Network meta-analysis of the outcome

­‘participant complete clearance’ in nonimmunosuppressed participants
of eight interventions for actinic keratosis: A follow-up on a Cochrane
review. _Br J Dermatol_ . 2013;169(2):250–259.
15. [No authors listed] New treatment for actinic keratosis. _Med Lett Drugs_

_Ther_ . 2002;44: 57–58.
16. Coleman WP 3rd, Yarborough JM, Mandy SH. Dermabrasion for

prophylaxis and treatment of actinic keratoses. _Dermatol Surg_ .
1996;22(1):17–21.
17. Kang S, Goldfarb MT, Weiss JS, et al. Assessment of adapalene gel for

the treatment of actinic keratoses and lentigines: A randomized trial.
_J Am Acad Dermatol_ . 2003;49(1):83–90.
18. Kurowska EM, Guthrie N, Muir A, Westcott N, Ferguson PJ, Morley K.

Chemopreventive effect of canola phenolic acid-enriched extract on
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene/12-O-tetradecanolylphorbol 12-acetate
(DMBA/TPA)-induced mouse skin carcinogenesis. AICR International
Research Conference on Food, Nutrition and Cancer; July 17, 2003;
Washington DC.
19. Mukherjee R, Chaturvedi P, Baisley J, et al. A phenolic acids rich extract

from canola meal: Potential candidate for melanoma skin cancer preven­
tion. _Proc Amer Assoc Cancer Res_ . 2006;47: (Abstract 282):66.
20. Balaji C, Muthukumaran J, Nalini N. Chemopreventive effect of sinapic

acid on 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-induced experimental rat colon carcino­
genesis. _Hum Exp Toxicol_ . Epub February 14, 2014.
21. Rivers JK, Arlette J, Shear N, Guenther L, Carey W, Poulin Y. Topical

treatment of actinic keratoses with 3.0% diclofenac in 2.5% hyaluronan
gel. _Br J Dermatol_ . 2002;146(1):94–100.
22. Gupta AK, Davey V, Mcphail H. Evaluation of the effectiveness of

imiquimod and 5-fluorouracil for the treatment of actinic keratosis:
Critical review and meta-analysis of efficacy studies. _J Cutan Med_
_Surg_ . 2005;9(5):209–214.
23. Siller G, Gebauer K, Welburn P, Katsamas J, Ogbourne SM. PEP005

(ingenol mebutate) gel, a novel agent for the treatment of actinic
­keratosis: results of a randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled, mul­
ticentre, phase IIa study. _Australas J Dermatol_ . 2009;50(1):16–22.
24. Roberts WE. Dermatologic problems of older women. _Dermatol Clin_ .

2006;24(2):271–280.
25. Pinkus H, Jallad M, Mehregan AH. The inflammatory infiltrate of

precancerous skin lesions. _J Invest Dermatol_ . 1963;41:247–248.
26. Ehrig T, Cockerell C, Piacquadio D, Dromgoole S. Actinic keratoses

and the incidence of occult squamous cell carcinoma: a clinical
­ histopathologic correlation. _Dermatol Surg_ . 2006;32(10):1261–1265.

27. Carag HR, Prieto VG, Yballe LS, Shea CR. Utility of step ­sections:

­demonstration of additional pathological findings in biopsy samples
initially diagnosed as actinic keratosis. _Arch Dermatol_ . 2000;136(4):

471–475.

28. Goldberg LH, Chang JR, Baer SC, Schmidt JD. Proliferative actinic

­keratosis: three representative cases. _Dermatol Surg_ . 2000;26(1):65–69.
29. Cook BA, Gravely AA, Nelson DB, Warshaw EM. Is tenderness a

reliable predictor for differentiating squamous cell carcinomas from
actinic keratoses? _J Am Acad Dermatol_ . 2011;65(1):211–212.
30. Roewert-Huber J, Stockfleth E, Kerl H. Pathology and pathobiology of

actinic (solar) keratosis – an update. _Br J Dermatol_ . 2007;157 Suppl 2:

18–20.



­


Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7 **submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com

**Dovepress**



­


**223**


Evans et al


31. Gupta AK, Paquet M, Villanueva E, Brintnell W. Interventions

for actinic keratoses. _Cochrane Database Syst Rev_ . 2012;12:

CD004415.

32. Dvorakova K, Dorr RT, Valcic S, Timmermann B, Alberts DS.

Pharmacokinetics of the green tea derivative, EGCG, by the topical
route of administration in mouse and human skin. _Cancer Chemother_

_Pharmacol_ . 1999;43(4):331–335.
33. Kamuhabwa AR, Geboes KR, de Witte PA. Investigation of the absorp­

tion of hypericin into the skin of hairless mice. _J Pharm Pharmacol_ .
2000;52(5):487–494.
34. Saija A, Tomaino A, Trombetta D, et al. In vitro and in vivo evalua­

tion of caffeic and ferulic acids as topical photoprotective agents. _Int J_
_Pharm_ . 2000;199(1):39–47.
35. Sander CS, Hamm F, Elsner P, Thiele JJ. Oxidative stress in malignant

melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer. _Br J Dermatol_ . 2003;148(5):

913–922.

36. Kostyuk VA, Potapovich AI, Lulli D, et al. Modulation of human

keratinocyte responses to solar UV by plant polyphenols as a basis for
chemoprevention of non-melanoma skin cancers. _Curr Med Chem_ .
2013;20(7):869–879.
37. Sander CS, Chang H, Hamm F, Elsner P, Thiele JJ. Role of oxidative

stress and the antioxidant network in cutaneous carcinogenesis. _Int J_
_Dermatol_ . 2004;43(5):326–335.
38. Poswig A, Wenk J, Brenneisen P, et al. Adaptive antioxidant response

of manganese-superoxide dismutase following repetitive UVA
­irradiation. _J Invest Dermatol_ . 1999;112(1):13–18.


**Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology**

**Publish your work in this journal**


Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology is an interna­
tional, peer-reviewed, open access, online journal that focuses on
the latest clinical and experimental research in all aspects of skin
disease and cosmetic interventions. All areas of dermatology will
be covered; contributions will be welcomed from all clinicians and



**Dovepress**


39. Meewes C, Brenneisen P, Wenk J, et al. Adaptive antioxidant response

protects dermal fibroblasts from UVA-induced phototoxicity. _Free Radic_
_Biol Med_ . 2001;30(3):238–247.
40. Shindo Y, Hashimoto T. Time course of changes in antioxidant

enzymes in human skin fibroblasts after UVA irradiation. _J Dermatol_
_Sci_ . 1997;14(3):225–232.
41. Sasaki H, Akamatsu H, Horio T. Protective role of copper, zinc super­

oxide dismutase against UVB-induced injury of the human keratinocyte
cell line HaCaT. _J Invest Dermatol_ . 2000;114(3):502–507.
42. Sasaki H, Akamatsu H, Horio T. Effects of a single exposure to UVB

radiation on the activities and protein levels of copper-zinc and manga­
nese superoxide dismutase in cultured human keratinocytes. _Photochem_
_Photobiol_ . 1997;65(4):707–713.
43. Shin DS, Kim KW, Chung HY, Yoon S, Moon JO. Effect of sinapic

acid against carbon tetrachloride-induced acute hepatic injury in rats.
_Arch Pharm Res_ . 2013;36(5):626–633.
44. Kim YO, Lee SW, Oh MS, Lee HJ. Effects of sinapic Acid of 4 vessel

occlusion model-induced ischemia and cognitive impairments in the
rat. _Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci_ . 2011;9(2):86–90.
45. Yun KJ, Koh DJ, Kim SH, et al. Anti-inflammatory effects of sinapic acid

through the suppression of inducible nitric oxide synthase, ­cyclooxygase-2,
and proinflammatory cytokines expressions via nuclear factor-kappaB
inactivation. _J Agric Food Chem_ . 2008;56(21):10265–10272.
46. Shin DS, Kim KW, Chung HY, Yoon S, Moon JO. Effect of sinapic

acid against dimethylnitrosamine-induced hepatic fibrosis in rats. _Arch_
_Pharm Res_ . 2013;36(5):608–618.


**Dovepress**


basic science researchers globally. This journal is indexed on CAS.
The manuscript management system is completely online and includes
a very quick and fair peer-review system, which is all easy to use.
[Visit http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes](http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php)
from published authors.



**Submit your manuscript here:** [http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-cosmetic-and-investigational-dermatology-journal](http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-cosmetic-and-investigational-dermatology-journal)



**224**



**submit your manuscript** | www.dovepress.com Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology 2014:7

**Dovepress**


