## **Original Article**
# **Relative efficacy of pimecrolimus cream and** **triamcinolone acetonide paste in the treatment of** **symptomatic oral lichen planus**

**Shantala Arunkumar, Anupama N Kalappanavar** **[1]** **, Rajeshwari G Annigeri** **[1]** **, Shakuntala G Kalappa** **[2]**


_Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, Sri Dharmasthala Manjunatheshwara College of Dental Sciences and Hospital, Dharwad,_
_1Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, College of Dental Sciences and Hospital, Davangere, Karnataka, 2Department of Oral Medicine and_

_Radiology, MAHE Institute of Dental Sciences and Hospital, Mahe, Pondicherry, India_


**Abstract**


**Background and Objectives:** Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a relatively common, chronic inflammatory condition that
frequently presents with symptoms of pain and burning sensation. It is generally a very unrelenting disorder despite
several kinds of treatment. Only symptomatic OLP requires treatment, and it remains a challenging predicament.
Efforts are made in a sustained manner for searching for novel therapies for symptomatic OLP. Therefore, this study
was aimed to compare the efficacy of treatment with topical pimecrolimus cream 1% with that of triamcinolone
acetonide oral paste 0.1% in subjects with symptomatic OLP. **Materials and Methods:** A prospective, parallel‑group,
randomized, active control clinical study was conducted among 30 symptomatic OLP subjects (20 females and
10 males, with 15 patients in each treatment group) treated with topical pimecrolimus 1% cream and triamcinolone
acetonide 0.1% oral paste four times daily for two consecutive months and treatment‑free follow‑up was performed
for 2 months. Pain or burning sensation, mean clinical score and presence of erythematous areas were assessed. The
data obtained were statistically analyzed using Wilcoxon’s Rank test and the Mann Whitney test. **Results:** Subjects in
both the groups showed significant improvement in symptom scores; however, the overall treatment response was
higher in the pimecrolimus group compared with the triamcinolone acetonide group. On intergroup comparison, there
was no statistically significant difference between the groups in the reduction in burning sensation ( _P_ = 0.18) and
erythematous area ( _P_ = 0.07), but there was a statistically highly significant improvement in reduction of clinical
scoring ( _P_ < 0.01%). Following the termination of the treatment, sustained remission of symptoms and long‑lasting
therapeutic effects was detected in 93.3% of the patients treated with pimecrolimus. **Interpretation and Conclusion:**
Topical pimecrolimus 1% cream showed better therapeutic response compared with triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%
oral paste in subjects with symptomatic OLP.


**Key words:** Oral lichen planus, pimecrolimus, triamcinolone acetonide



**INTRODUCTION**


Lichen planus (LP) is a chronic inflammatory
dermatosis of the skin and mucous membranes.

In 1869, Erasmus Wilson delineated and named
the condition Lichen planus. LP is derived from the
Greek word “Lichen,” which means “tree moss” and
the Latin word “planus,” which means “flat.” [[1]] The
prevalence of LP in various populations has been found
to be 0.1–4%, with peak incidence between the ages


**Access this article online**



of 30 and 60 years and more commonly affecting
women; children are rarely affected. [[2,3]]


Clinically, oral lichen planus (OLP) presents as white
striations, papules, plaques, erythema, erosions or
blisters, affecting predominantly the buccal mucosa,
tongue and gingival, etc. [[4]] The reticular form is most
common and asymptomatic, but the erosive, atrophic
and bullous forms are typically the most symptomatic
forms usually seeking urgent treatment. [[5]]


Multiple topical and systemic treatments have been
reported to be effective, including systemic and


**Address for correspondence:**
Dr. Shantala Arunkumar,
Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, Sri Dharmastala
Manjunatheshwara College of Dental Sciences and Hospital,
Dharwad, 580009, Karnataka, India.
E‑mail: jinkashanti@gmail.com


|QuickResponseCode:|Website:<br>www.ijdentistry.com|
|---|---|
|**Quick Response Code:**|**DOI:**<br>10.4103/0975-962X.151692|



**14** Indian Journal of Dentistry | March 2015 | Vol 6 | Issue 1


Arunkumar, _et al_ .: Pimecrolimus cream for the treatment of symptomatic oral lichen planus



topical immunosuppressants such as corticosteroids,
griseofulvin, dapsone, hydroxychloroquine, cyclosprin,
tarcolimus, etc. [[5]] But, till date, no fully resolutive
and effective treatment has been found. [[6]] Therefore,
the management of symptomatic OLP represents a
confounding therapeutic challenge. Despite numerous
existing remedies, there are many treatment failures
and there is no definite cure for this oral lesion.


Topical corticosteroids remain the first line of
therapy in OLP and triamcinolone acetonide paste
is the most widely used commercial preparation for
OLP; unfortunately, some patients are refractory to
corticosteroids and often unable to tolerate their

long‑term side‑effects. Therefore, supplementary,
efficacious treatments are considered necessary for
patients with OLP. [[5]]


Pimecrolimus, a new, nonsteroidal topical
immunomodulator, is finding increasing application
in recalcitrant inflammatory skin and mucosal disease
and have been tried for the treatment of OLP, showing
promising results. They act by binding to macrophillin12
and subsequently inhibit dephosphorylation of nuclear
factor of activated T cells by calcineurin. This markedly
reduces the production of TH1 cytokines and inhibits the
mast cell production of pro‑inflammatory cytokines. The
efficacy of these treatments is likely attributable to the
inhibition of the T‑cell mediated‑pathogenesis of OLP. [[5]]


**MATERIALS AND METHODS**


**Study setting**
The present prospective, parallel‑group, randomized,
active control clinical study was conducted in 30 patients
(20 females, 10 males; age range 20–64 years) with
a confirmed diagnosis of symptomatic OLP based
on clinical and histopathological features in the
Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, College
of Dental Sciences, Davangere, Karnataka, India.


Inclusion criteria of the study was patients with
symptomatic OLP (pain and or burning sensation) who
were agreeing for the biopsy and were ready to apply
the medication supplied. Patients with a history of
malignancy, immunocompromised diseases, current
systemic or generalized infections, history of pregnancy
or breast feeding, received topical or systemic
immunosuppressants, retinoids or any other systemic
therapies known to cause or suspected to have an effect
on OLP within the last 4 weeks and patients allergic
to the drugs supplied were excluded from the study.


All the participants were explained the need and
design of the study and the possible adverse effects,



and only those patients who gave a signed informed
consent on an institutionally approved document were
included in the study. The study was reviewed and
approved by our ethical committee.


The patients were divided into two groups, 15 patients
in Group “A” were instructed to apply a thin layer of
pimecrolimus cream 1% (10 g, pacroma 1%; Ajanta
Pharmaceuticals Ltd.) four times a day for a total of 2
months and 15 patients in Group “B” were instructed
to apply triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% oral paste
(5 g, kenacort 0.1%: Mepromax Life Sciences P.Ltd)
for four times a day on symptomatic OLP lesions for
2 months. Patients were instructed to gently dry the
area of application with clean dry cotton just before
the application of the drug and to restrain from eating,
drinking or rinsing their mouth for 30 min after each
application. All the patients were assessed monthly
for 2 months during the treatment course (visits 1–3)
and followed‑up with 2 months of treatment‑free
observation (visit 4). The clinical parameters were
recorded upon clinical examination at baseline and at
each subsequent visit.


All patients had four visits for the study; they were
reviewed on the 0, 1 [st], 2 [nd] and 4 [th] months, and each
visit consisted of measuring the intensity of pain
and/or burning sensation by using a Visual Analogue
Scale (VAS) of 0–10 (with 1 mm divisions, where “0” is
no burning sensation and “10” is worst possible burning
sensation). The patients were asked to mark VAS at a
point that best represented the level of the symptoms.
The size of the lesion was recorded by clinical scoring
of the lesion using the criteria scale described by
Thongprason _et al._ Erythematous areas were recorded
by the symbols “+” for presence or “_” for absence.
All the scores were recorded at baseline and at each

subsequent visit after the administration of the drug
therapy and during the treatment‑free follow‑up, and
relevant data collected were entered in a proforma and
subjected to appropriate statistical analysis.


The results are presented as mean ± SD for
quantitative data and number and percentages for
categorical data. Because the data are in scores,
nonparametric tests were used for intra‑ (Wilcoxon’s
Sign Rank test) and inter‑ (Mann Whitney test) group
comparisons. For all the tests, a _P_ value of 0.05 or
less was considered as statistically significant.


**RESULTS**


A total of 30 adult subjects were enrolled in the
study, 20 females and 10 males, suggesting female
predilection with a male to female ratio of 2:1. The age



Indian Journal of Dentistry | March 2015 | Vol 6 | Issue 1 **15**


Arunkumar, _et al_ .: Pimecrolimus cream for the treatment of symptomatic oral lichen planus



of the patients ranged from 20 to 64 years, and the
mean age of the subjects was 36.7 ± 13.4 years. All
the patients were symptomatic with erosive, ulcerative
lesions and with additional reticular lesions as well.


In both Group A and Group B, reduction in mean
scores of burning sensation was observed during the
treatment period. However, this reduction was higher
in the pimecrolimus group than that in the triamcinolone
acetonide group at the end of the 1 [st] month, i.e.
57% and 49%, respectively, and at the end of the
2 [nd] month (93% and 92%, respectively) Reduction in
burning sensation was higher in Group A than in Group
B, and it was statistically highly significant ( _P_ < 0.01).
During the treatment‑free follow‑up period, at the end
of the 4 [th] month, reduction of burning sensation was
98% and 89%, respectively, and it was statistically
highly significant ( _P_ < 0.01). But, on intergroup
comparison, at the end of the 1 [st], 2 [nd] and 4 [th] months, it
was statistically nonsignificant [Table 1 and Figure 1].


There was reduction in mean clinical scores in both the

groups after the treatment. However, this reduction
during the treatment was higher in the pimecrolimus
group than in the triamcinolone acetonide group,



i.e. 49% and 44%, respectively, at the end of the
1 [st] month (2 [nd] visit). Similar reductions were seen at
the end of the 2 [nd] month, 80% and 85%, respectively,
and this was statistically highly significant ( _P_ < 0.01).
During the posttreatment follow‑up of 2 months,
it was 95% and 80%, respectively, which was
statistically highly significant ( _P_ < 0.01). On
intergroup comparison, at the end of the 1 [st] and
2 [nd] months, it was statistically nonsignificant, but at
the 4 [th] month during treatment‑free follow‑up it was
highly significant ( _P_ < 0.01) [Table 2 and Figure 2].


Improvement in resolution of erythematous areas
during the treatment at the end of the 1 [st] month was
80% and 20%, respectively in the pimecrolimus and
triamcinolone acetate groups, which was statistically
highly significant ( _P_ < 0.01). At the end of the
2 [nd] month, none of the patients had existence of
erythematous areas in both Group A and Group B
and no statistical difference was found. After the

posttreatment follow‑up of 2 months, the erythematous
areas reappeared in 6.7% and 33.3% subjects in the
pimecrolimus and triamcinolone acetonide groups,
respectively, but no statistical difference was found
( _P_ = 0.07) [Table 3 and Figure 3].



































**16** Indian Journal of Dentistry | March 2015 | Vol 6 | Issue 1


Arunkumar, _et al_ .: Pimecrolimus cream for the treatment of symptomatic oral lichen planus





**Figure 2:** Intergroup comparison of clinical score













**Figure 1:** Intergroup comparison of burning sensation

























**Figure 3:** Intergroup comparison of the erythematous area





**Figure 5:** Triamcinolone acetonide group (5a- 1 [st] visit) (5b- 4 [th] visit)


**DISCUSSION**


In the present study, both the drugs resulted in
reduction of burning sensation, clinical scores and
erythematous areas. Improved patient’s quality of life
was observed during the 2 months of treatment period.
At the end of the study, difference of clinical scores
between groups was highly statistically significant,
whereas burning sensation and erythematous areas
were statistically nonsignificant. However, better
results in all the parameters were observed in the
pimecrolimus group compared with the triamcinolone
group. These clinical changes are seen in the
Figures 4 and 5. This is consistent with the study
conducted by Gourouhi _et al_ . [[7]]



**Figure 4:** Pimecrolimus group (4a- 1 [st] visit) (4b- 4 [th] visit)


Despite various alternative treatment options,
corticosteroids remain the treatment of choice for

symptomatic OLP because of the autoimmune nature
of OLP and its effects on the epithelial and connective
tissues. [[8]] The efficacy of topical triamcinolone
acetonide is primarily due to the local anti‑inflammatory
properties of suppressing T‑cell function. [[9]] The search
for new topical anti‑inflammatory agents without the
adverse effects of topical corticosteroid has resulted
in the development of an topical immunomodulator,
i.e. pimecrolimus. [[4]] Therefore, in this present study, we
have tried this topical drug to manage symptomatic OLP.


Pimecrolimus (SDZ ASM 981), an ascomycin
derivative, is a new addition to dermatologic
therapeutics. It is one of the new classes of
immunomodulating macrolactams and was specifically
developed for the treatment of inflammatory skin
diseases. [[10]] The clinical efficacy of pimecrolimus was
confirmed after topical application in patients with
atopic dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis. The
safety and tolerability of pimecrolimus after repeated
topical application of the 1% cream formulation were
observed in moderate to severe atopic dermatitis
and were shown to be well tolerated and safe even

after repeated topical application, in contrast to
corticosteroids, with no potential to induce skin
atrophy. The interest in pimecrolimus has been
substantial because of its significant anti‑inflammatory
activity, immunomodulatory capabilities and its low
systemic immunosuppressive potential. [[11]]



Indian Journal of Dentistry | March 2015 | Vol 6 | Issue 1 **17**


Arunkumar, _et al_ .: Pimecrolimus cream for the treatment of symptomatic oral lichen planus



Pimecrolimus is derived from S _treptomyces hygropicus_
_var_, ascomycetus; like all ascomycins, it is an
immunophilin ligand that binds specifically to the
cytosolic receptor, immunophilin macrophilin‑12.
This pimecrolimus–macrophilin complex effectively
inhibits the protein phosphatase calcineurin by
preventing calcineurin from dephosphorylating
the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NF‑AT), a
transcription factor. This results in the blockage of
signal transduction pathways in T cells and inhibits
the synthesis of inflammatory cytokines, specially
Th1‑ and Th2‑type cytokines. Furthermore, it has also
been shown to prevent the release of cytokines and
pro‑inflammatory mediators from mast cells. Studies
on the effectiveness of pimecrolimus cream compared
with steroids in many dermatologic diseases showed
no associated side‑effects such as local atrophy,
fragility and telangiectasias, and to promote infections,
including acute candidiasis characteristic of a topical
steroids. [[10]]


In our study, the higher reduction in VAS score seen
in the pimocrolimus group can be attributed to its
efficacy in OLP due to its immunophilin ligand binding
specifically to the cytosolic receptor and acting by
inhibition of the release of numerous inflammatory
cytokines, thereby preventing the cascade of immune
and inflammatory signals. [[7]]


The efficacy of triamcinolone acetonide paste can
be attributed to its local anti‑inflammatory and
antimmunological properties of suppressing T‑cell
function, which is in accordance with a prospective,
randomized comparative study, where twice‑daily
application of 0.1% triamcinolone acetonide was
compared with 0.03% tacrolimus. [[12]]


In the present study, pimecrolimus has shown
significant improvement in all the clinical parameters.
This is similar to the studies reported by Swift _et al._, [[4]]
Pedraza _et al._, [[13]] Taebunpakul _et al._, [[14]] Passerron
_et al._, [[15]] Volz _et al._ [[16]] and McCaughey _et al_ ., [[17]] where
pimecrolimus has shown superior results compared
with placebo.


Pimecrolimus is available only in a cream form;
therefore, it was recommended to apply the drug
four times daily. In a case report, pimecrolimus was
successfully used in a hydrophilic adhesive gel base
with effective and tolerable results. By virtue of higher
absorption in the form of oral paste or any other
appropriate form, we can suggest that by replacing
it with a pimecrolimus orabase, we may find even
higher efficacy in terms of short‑term and maintenance
effects. [[7,18]]



All the subjects were followed‑up for 2 months
with treatment‑free observation (visit 4), and the
symptoms and erythematous areas reappeared in
one subject in Group A and five subjects in Group B,
which was statistically nonsignificant ( _P_ = 0.07).
This is in accordance with the recent randomized

vehicle‑controlled study that showed that topical
pimecrolimus was effective in controlling the
symptoms of OLP up to 30 days after cessation
of therapy [[19]] because it was associated with less
impairment of langerhans cell function, offering a
better long‑term safety profile. At the completion of
the treatment, none of the patients had any serious
adverse effects locally or systemically to both the
medications.


From our study, it can be concluded that topical
pimecrolimus 1% cream, applied four times daily for
2 months, has a better therapeutic advantage than
triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%, with less or no local or
systemic adverse effects. However, this drug may be
an important addition to previously existing treatment
modalities for symptomatic OLP.


However, in our study, pimecrolimus was used in a
cream form and adherence of drug to the mucosal
surface was not satisfactory; therefore, patients were
instructed to apply it for four times a day repeated
application. If it is used in a hydrophilic adhesive gel
base, more therapeutic benefits may be achieved and
it can find even higher efficacy in terms of short‑term
and maintenance effects.


**CONCLUSION**


Topical pimecrolimus has an enormous potential as
a new therapy for symptomatic erosive or ulcerative
OLP refractory to other topical and systemic
therapies, and the results from the present study are
highly encouraging. The use of topical pimecrolimus
1% cream applied four times showed salutary
results than triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% paste
and substantial reduction in all the parameters were
noted. But, there is a need for appropriate studies to
establish the efficacy of pimecrolimus with orabase
for its prolonged long‑term efficacy and to determine
its malignant potential. The present study was a
parallel‑group, randomized, active control clinical
study, but the study would have been still more valid
if it had been a double‑blinded, randomized clinical
control study instead. However, because the sample
size is small, further studies are recommended on
a larger sample size with a long‑term follow‑up to
confirm its efficacy and safety with the immunologic
markers, in order to minimize the effects of



**18** Indian Journal of Dentistry | March 2015 | Vol 6 | Issue 1


Arunkumar, _et al_ .: Pimecrolimus cream for the treatment of symptomatic oral lichen planus



confounding factors and to maximize the sensitivity
for detecting subtle changes of the mucosa during
the course of the treatment.


**REFERENCES**


1. Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, Gilchrest BA, Paller AS,
Leffell DJ. Fitzpatrick’s Text book of dermatology in general
medicine. Vol. 1. US of America. 7 [th] ed. 2008. p. 463‑76.


2. Edwards P, Kelsch R. Oral Lichen Planus: Clinical Presentation
and Management. J Can Dent Assoc 2002;68:494‑9.


3. Sugerman PB, Savge NW. Oral lichen planus: Causes, diagnosis
and management. Aust Dent J 2002;47:290‑7.


4. McCaughey C, Machan M, Bennet R, Zone JJ, Hull CM.
Pimecrolimus 1% cream for oral erosive lichen planus‑A 6 weeks
randomized, double blind, vehicle controlled study with a 6 week
open label extension to assess efficacy and safety. J Eur Acad
Dermatol Venereol 2011;25:1061‑7.


5. Swift JC, Rees TD, Plemons JM, Hallmon WW, Wright JC. The
effectiveness of 1% Pimecrolimus cream in the treatment of Oral

Lichen Planus. J Periodontol 2005;76:627‑35.


6. Salazar‑Sánchez N, López‑Jornet P, Camacho‑Alonso F,
Sánchez‑Siles M. Efficacy of topical aloe vera in patients with
oral lichen planus: A randomized double blind study. J Oral
Pathol Med 2010;39:735‑40.


7. Gorouhi F, Solhpour A, Beitollahi JM, Afshar S, Davari P,
Hashemi P, _et al_ . Randomized trial of Pimecrolimus cream Vs
Triamcinolone acetonide paste in the treatment of OLP. J Am
Acad Dermatol 2007;57:806‑13.


8. Gonzalez‑Garcia A, Diniz‑Freitas M, Gandara‑Vila P,
Blanco‑Carrion A, Garcia‑Garcia A, Gandara‑Rey J.
Triamcinolone acetonide mouth rinses for treatment of erosive
oral lichen planus: Efficacy and risk of fungal over‑infection. Oral
Dis 2006;12:559‑65.


9. Xia J, Li C, Hong Y, Yang L, Huang Y, Cheng B. Short –term
clinical evaluation of intralesional triamcinolone acetonide



injection for ulcerative oral lichen planus. J Oral Pathol Med
2006;35:327‑31.


10. Swift JC, Rees TD, Plemons JM, Hallmon WW, Wright JC. The

effectiveness of 1% Pimecrolimus cream in the treatment of Oral

Lichen Planus. J Periodontol 2005;76:627‑35.


11. Gupta AK, Chow M. Pimecrolimus: A review. J Eur Acad

Dermatol Venerel 2003;17:493‑503.


12. Allen BR, Lakhanpaul M, Morris A, Lateo S, Davies T,

Scott G, _et al_ . Systemic exposure, tolerability, and efficacy of
Pimecrolimus cream 1% in atopic dermatitis patient. Arch Dis
Child 2003;88:969‑73.


13. Swarna YM, Ali M, Rajeshwari AG, Devarasa GM. A comaparative

evaluation of tacrolimus and triamcinolone acetonide in the
management of Symptomatic Oral Lichen Planus. J Indian Acad
Oral Med Radiol 2011;23:184‑9.


14. Chatchatee T, Piboonratanakit, Thomprasong K. Topical

Pimecrolimus 1% cream in the treatment of OLP. Thai J

Pharmacol 2005;27:2‑3.


15. Pesseron T, Lacour JP, Fontas E, Ortonne JP. Treatment of OLP

with 1% Pimecrolimus cream. Arch Dermatol 2007;143:470‑6.


16. Volz T, Caroli U, Lüdtke H, Bräutigam M, Kohler‑Späth H,

Röcken M, _et al_ . Pimecrolimus cream 1% in erosive lichen
planus‑ A prospective randomized double blind vehicle controlled
study. Br J Dermatol 2008;159:936‑41.


17. Bogaert H, Sanchez E. Lichen planus: Treatment of thirty cases

with systemic and topical Phenytoin. Int J Dermatol 1990;29:157‑8.


18. Pedraza LE, Fernandez-Cuevas L, Ortiz-Pedroza G, Reyes
Gutierrez E, Orozco-Topete R. Treatment of OLP with topical
Pimecrolimus 1% cream. Br J Dermatol 2004;150:771-3.


19. Al Johani KA, Hegarty AM, Porter SR, Fedele S. Calcineurin

inhibitors in oral medicine. J Am Acad Dermatol 2009;61:829‑40.


**How to cite this article:** Arunkumar S, Kalappanavar AN, Annigeri RG,
Kalappa SG. Relative efficacy of pimecrolimus cream and triamcinolone
acetonide paste in the treatment of symptomatic oral lichen planus.
Indian J Dent 2015;6:14-9.

**Source of Support:** Nil. **Conflict of Interest:** None declared.



Indian Journal of Dentistry | March 2015 | Vol 6 | Issue 1 **19**


