
## Page 1

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
DOI 10.1186/s13063-015-1080-8

*[Image]*

RESEARCH
Open Access

*[Image]*

The effect of iodine supplementation in
pregnancy on early childhood
neurodevelopment and clinical outcomes:
results of an aborted randomised placebo-
controlled trial

Shao J. Zhou1,2, Sheila A. Skeaff3, Philip Ryan4, Lex W. Doyle5,6,7, Peter J. Anderson6,7, Louise Kornman5,
Andrew J. Mcphee8, Lisa N. Yelland1,4 and Maria Makrides1,9,10*

Abstract

Background: Concern that mild iodine deficiency in pregnancy may adversely affect neurodevelopment of
offspring has led to recommendations for iodine supplementation in the absence of evidence from randomised
controlled trials. The primary objective of the study was to investigate the effect of iodine supplementation during
pregnancy on childhood neurodevelopment. Secondary outcomes included pregnancy outcomes, maternal thyroid
function and general health.

Methods: Women with a singleton pregnancy of fewer than 20 weeks were randomly assigned to iodine (150 μg/
d) or placebo from trial entry to birth. Childhood neurodevelopment was assessed at 18 months by using Bayley
Scales of Infant and Toddler Development (Bayley-III). Iodine status and thyroid function were assessed at baseline
and at 36 weeks’ gestation. Pregnancy outcomes were collected from medical records.
Results: The trial was stopped after 59 women were randomly assigned following withdrawal of support by the
funding body. There were no differences in childhood neurodevelopmental scores between the iodine treated and
placebo groups. The mean cognitive, language and motor scores on the Bayley-III (iodine versus placebo, respectively)
were 99.4 ± 12.2 versus 101.7 ± 8.2 (mean difference (MD) −2.3, 95 % confidence interval (CI) −7.8, 3.2; P = 0.42), 97.2 ±
12.2 versus 97.9 ± 11.5 (MD −0.7, 95 % CI −7.0, 5.6; P = 0.83) and 93.9 ± 10.8 versus 92.4 ± 9.7 (MD 1.4, 95 % CI −4.0, 6.9;
P = 0.61), respectively. No differences were identified between groups in any secondary outcomes.
Conclusions: Iodine supplementation in pregnancy did not result in better childhood neurodevelopment in this small
trial. Adequately powered randomised controlled trials are needed to provide conclusive evidence regarding the effect
of iodine supplementation in pregnancy.

Trials registration: The trial was registered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry at http://
www.anzctr.org.au. The registration number of this trial is ACTRN12610000411044. The trial was registered on
21 May 2010.

Keywords: Iodine, Supplementation, Pregnancy, Child development, RCT

* Correspondence: maria.makrides@sa.gov.au
1Women’s & Children’s Health Research Institute, 72 King William Road, North
Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia
9School of Paediatrics & Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Frome
Road, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© 2015 Zhou et al. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.


---

## Page 2

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 2 of 9

Background
Iodine is essential for the production of thyroid hor-
mones. Iodine deficiency encompasses a spectrum of
disorders, including impaired growth and neurodeve-
lopment [1]. Pregnant women have a higher risk of
iodine deficiency because of their increased iodine re-
quirement [2]. Severe iodine deficiency during preg-
nancy causes cretinism and irreversible brain damage
in the offspring [1]. There is increasing concern that
mild to moderate iodine deficiency during pregnan-
cy—which has emerged as a public health issue in a
number of developed countries, including Australia
and the UK—may lead to cognitive deficits and learn-
ing disability in children.

Methods
Participants and recruitment
Pregnant women were approached to enter the trial at
their first antenatal visit. They were eligible if they were
less than 20 weeks’ gestation with a singleton preg-
nancy. Women were excluded if they were taking a
supplement containing iodine, had a history of thyroid
disease or drug or alcohol abuse, their fetus had a
known major abnormality, or if English was not the
main language spoken at home. Ethical approval was
obtained from the Human Research Ethics Committee
at each participating centre (Children, Youth & Women’s
Health Service Research Ethics Committee and the Flin-
ders Clinical Research Ethics Committee), and written in-
formed consent was obtained from each participant. The
trial was registered on the Australian and New Zealand
Clinical Trials Registry (#ACTRN12610000411044).

A recent systematic review of randomised controlled
trials (RCTs) highlighted that the effect of iodine sup-
plementation in pregnancy in regions with mild to
moderate iodine deficiency is unclear because none of
the RCTs conducted in those regions assessed devel-
opmental outcomes of children [3]. There is some
evidence from non-randomised intervention studies
suggesting that iodine supplementation in pregnancy
in regions of mild to moderate iodine deficiency may
improve cognitive function in children [4]. Conversely,
adverse effects on child development in relation to
iodine supplementation in pregnancy have also been
reported from cohort studies [5]. These emerging data
have been differentially interpreted by expert groups
and government authorities worldwide, resulting in
various approaches to address this public health issue.

Randomisation and treatment
Women were randomly assigned to iodine or placebo in
the ratio of 1:1 through a web-based randomisation ser-
vice. The randomisation schedule was generated inde-
pendently with balanced, variable-sized blocks and was
stratified by centre, parity (0 versus ≥1), and gestational
age at randomisation (≤16 weeks’ versus >16 weeks’).
Neither the women nor the research staff were aware of
the women’s group allocation. The iodine supplements
contained 150 μg of iodine per tablet as potassium iod-
ide, whereas the placebo tablets contained no iodine.
Women were asked to take one trial tablet daily from
randomisation to the end of their pregnancy. The trial
tablets were manufactured and donated by Blackmores
(Warriewood, Australia). All tablets were similar in size,
shape, smell and colour. Women were supplied with ex-
cess tablets and were asked to return any unused tablets
at the end of the pregnancy as a measure of compliance.
Regular telephone calls during the intervention period
were made to monitor adverse side effects and encour-
age compliance.

The American Thyroid Association and the European
Thyroid Association have recommended routine iodine
supplementation in pregnancy [6, 7], whereas the rec-
ommendation for iodine supplements in pregnancy by
the World Health Organization (WHO) is dependent
on the iodised salt coverage and the iodine status of the
population [8]. There are no specific recommendations
from the government authorities in the UK or USA. In
Australia and New Zealand, mandatory iodine fortifica-
tion of bread was implemented in 2009. In addition,
the Australian National Health and Medical Research
Council (NHMRC) recommended that all pregnant
women take an iodine supplement of 150 μg/d [9] be-
cause of concerns that the mandatory iodine fortifica-
tion may not be adequate to prevent iodine deficiency
in pregnant women [10]. The present study was de-
signed as a double-blind placebo-controlled multi-
centre RCT in Australia and New Zealand. The aim of
the study was to assess the effect of iodine supplemen-
tation in pregnancy over and above the mandatory iod-
ine fortification on childhood neurodevelopment and
other clinical outcomes, including pregnancy outcomes,
maternal thyroid function, mental health and general
well-being.

Outcome assessments
Childhood neurodevelopment
The primary outcome of childhood neurodevelopment
was assessed at 18 months of age by using the cogni-
tive, language and motor composites of the Bayley
Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, third edi-
tion
(Bayley-III)
[11].
Composite
scores
are
age-
standardised with a normative mean of 100 and a
standard deviation of 15. The standardised scores were
also classified into the categories of any developmental
delay (<85) and moderate/severe developmental delay
(<70). The social-emotional behaviours and adaptive
behaviours scales of the Bayley-III were also adminis-
tered.
Bayley-III
was
used
to
assess
childhood


---

## Page 3

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 3 of 9

development as it is the most widely used objective
measure of early development. It is used extensively in
research including neonatal trials and has a moderate
association with later intelligence quotient (IQ) [12].

composites and allowing for adjustment for potential
confounders and loss to follow-up. A 4-point difference
was considered important in the context of other nutri-
tional deficiencies and environmental exposures that have
resulted in major public health campaigns [18, 19].

The primary analysis was based on the intention-to-
treat principle by comparing the outcomes between the
randomised treatment groups. Continuous outcomes were
analysed by using t tests, or Kruskal-Wallis tests for non-
normally distributed outcomes. Binary outcomes were
analysed by using chi-squared tests, or Fisher’s exact tests
for rare outcomes. Owing to a substantial sex imbalance
between groups, a post hoc analysis was performed with
adjustment for infant sex for the Bayley-III composites
and anthropometric measurements at birth. No adjusted
analysis was performed for other outcomes, because of
the small sample size.

Iodine status and thyroid function
At study entry and 36 weeks’ gestation, women were
asked to collect a spot urine sample to assess urinary
iodine concentration (UIC). UIC was determined by
using the modified WHO Method A [13]. A blood sam-
ple was also collected at baseline by venepuncture to as-
sess thyroid hormone concentrations, including thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH), thyroglobulin (Tg), free tri-
iodothyronine (fT3) and free thyroxine (fT4). Thyroid
function of newborns was also assessed from cord blood
(TSH, fT3, fT4 and Tg) and from newborn screening
(TSH only). A breast milk sample 6 weeks after birth
was collected, where possible, to assess breast milk iod-
ine concentration by inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry method [14].

Pregnancy and other clinical outcomes
Pregnancy and birth outcome data were collected by
blinded review of medical records. Small and large for
gestational age were defined as birth weight below the
10th and above the 90th percentile, respectively, for ges-
tational age and sex [15]. Preterm birth was defined as
gestational age at birth of fewer than 37 completed
weeks. Gestational age was estimated on the basis of a
composite of the last menstrual period and a dating
ultrasound early in pregnancy, where available.

General health and well-being of women were assessed
by using validated questionnaires, including the 36-Item
Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) [16] and the Depres-
sion Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS) [17] at study entry,
36 weeks’ gestation and 6 weeks’ post-partum.

Other assessments
Demographic characteristics were recorded at study
entry. Safety of the intervention was assessed via tele-
phone calls to women at 2 weeks after randomisation,
and at 20, 28 and 36 weeks’ gestation, to assess potential
side effects, including the frequency of sweating and pal-
pitation, gastrointestinal side effects, including nausea,
diarrhoea and constipation, as well as any serious ad-
verse events defined as death or intensive care admission
of either mother or baby.

Results
Of the 645 women approached, 205 met the eligibility
criteria. A total of 59 out of 205 (29 %) women were en-
rolled in the study from the Women’s & Children’s
Hospital and the Flinders Medical Centre in Adelaide,
Australia, between June 2010 and October 2010 (Fig. 1).
Twenty-nine were randomly allocated to iodine and 30
to placebo (Fig. 1). The baseline demographic character-
istics of the participants are listed in Table 1. The trial
was stopped early, before recruitment began in other
Australian centres and New Zealand, because the fund-
ing body (NHMRC) withdrew its support for the trial.
The NHMRC considered a placebo-controlled trial in-
consistent with its recommendation for iodine supple-
mentation in pregnancy. The ethics committees did not
withdraw approval for the trial, but in view of the fund-
ing body’s position it supported the trial management
committee’s decision to unblind the study and to follow
all randomly assigned women as planned to monitor
safety. Women were informed of their treatment group
allocation and were provided with a copy of the NHMRC
recommendation for iodine supplementation in pregnancy
[9]. All women except two (one from each group) con-
sented to continue with the follow-up after unblinding.
The mean gestational age at unblinding was 33 ± 7 weeks.
The mean duration of intervention before unblinding was
16 weeks (range 2–23 weeks). Nine (31 %) women in the
iodine group and 4 (13 %) in the placebo group gave birth
before unblinding. The decision regarding whether to con-
tinue taking trial supplements or to take commercially
available iodine supplements was at the women’s discre-
tion. Five women in the iodine group and 18 in the pla-
cebo group stopped taking trial supplements. Only one
woman in the placebo group commenced iodine supple-
ments after unblinding.

Sample size and statistical analysis
A sample size of 542 women per group was required to
detect a minimum clinically meaningful difference in
the Bayley-III composites of 4 points between the treat-
ment groups with 90 % power, using a Bonferroni ad-
justed α = 0.017 for each of the three primary Bayley-III


---

## Page 4

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 4 of 9

Fig. 1 Participant flowchart

92.4 ± 9.7, MD 1.4; 95 % CI −4.0, 6.9; P = 0.61) develop-
ment (Table 2). Adjustment for sex of the children did
not change the outcome (data not shown). There were
no differences in the percentage of children with any or
moderate/severe developmental delay or in the parent-
reported social-emotional behaviours and adaptive be-
haviour scores between the groups (Table 2).

Neurodevelopment of children
The mean composite score of the children did not dif-
fer between the iodine and the placebo groups in cogni-
tive (99.4 ± 12.2 versus 101.7 ± 8.2, mean difference
(MD): −2.3; 95 % confidence interval (CI) −7.8, 3.2; P =
0.42), language (97.2 ± 12.2 versus 97.9 ± 11.5, MD −0.7;
95 % CI −7.0, 5.6; P = 0.83) or motor (93.9 ± 10.8 versus


---

## Page 5

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 5 of 9

Table 1 Baseline demographic characteristics

Iodine
(n = 29)

Placebo
(n = 30)

Age at trial entry, yearsa
29.1 (5.7)
29.8 (5.1)

Gestational age at trial entry, weeksa
15.2 (2.6)
14.9 (2.4)

Primiparousb
13 (44.8)
13 (43.3)

Completed secondary educationb
20 (69.0)
22 (73.3)

Completed further educationb
22 (75.9)
24 (80.0)

Smoke at trial entry or leading up to pregnancyb
7 (24.1)
5 (16.7)

Miscarriage in previous pregnancyb
8 (27.6)
12 (40.0)

Previous or current depressionb
4 (13.8)
7 (23.3)

Pregnancy and other clinical outcomes
The mean birth weight, length, head circumference and
gestational age at birth did not differ between the groups
(Table 4). Adjustment for infant sex did not change the
outcome (data not shown). The percentage of infants
classified as low birth weight (<2500 g) or small for ges-
tational age or large for gestational age, or with a neo-
natal complication or major congenital abnormality, did
not differ between the treatment and placebo groups
(Table 4). Other pregnancy outcomes, including rate of
preterm birth, miscarriage, still birth and antenatal hos-
pital admission, were also not different between the
groups (Table 4).

BMI at trial entrya
25.3 (5.9)
23.6 (3.9)

Pre-pregnancy BMIa
23.6 (5.5)
22.2 (4.3)

Infant sex: maleb
20 (71.4)
9 (31.0)

BMI body mass index
aData are presented as mean (standard deviation)
bData are presented as number (percentage)

No women had medically diagnosed depression in
pregnancy, and one woman in the iodine group had
post-natal depression. There were no differences in the
SF-36 or DASS outcomes or the frequency of sweating
and palpitation, gastrointestinal side effects or any ser-
ious adverse events between the treatment groups (data
not shown).

Iodine status and thyroid function of mothers and infants
The median (interquartile range) UICs of women at
baseline (15 weeks’ gestation) and at 36 weeks’ gestation
are shown in Fig. 2. The UIC increased from baseline to
36 weeks in the iodine group (median change (interquar-
tile range) from baseline was 87 (−1 to 134) μg/l, P =
0.001) but not the placebo group (−2 (−76 to 37) μg/l, P =
0.71). The median (interquartile range) breast milk iodine
concentration at 6 weeks after birth was 107 (79–147)
μg/l overall, and there was no difference in breast milk
concentration between the iodine and the placebo
group (Table 3). Similarly there were no differences in
cord blood fT3, fT4, TSH and Tg concentration be-
tween the groups (Table 3). Mean TSH of newborn or
percentage of newborn with TSH of more than 5 mU/l
from the routine newborn screen test also did not differ
between the groups.

Discussion
Our study is the first randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial conducted in an industrialised country to
assess the effect of routine iodine supplementation in
pregnancy on childhood development. Although the un-
foreseeable early cessation of the trial resulted in a
shorter duration of intervention and a significant reduc-
tion in the sample size, which may bias our results to-
ward a null finding, we found no consistent trend of a
higher or lower mean score in the neurodevelopmental
outcomes between the iodine-supplemented and the pla-
cebo groups. Based on a recent national health survey of
school-age children and non-pregnant adults, including
childbearing aged women, Australia is no longer iodine-
deficient after mandatory iodine fortification [20]. The

Table 2 Developmental outcomes from the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development (Bayley-III)

Outcome
Iodine (n = 27)
Placebo (n = 26)
Treatment effect (95 % CI)
P value

Cognitive Standardised Scorea
99.4 (12.2)
101.7 (8.2)
−2.3 (−7.8, 3.2)
0.42

Language Standardised Scorea
97.2 (12.2)
97.9 (11.5)
−0.7 (−7.0, 5.6)
0.83

Motor Standardised Scorea
93.9 (10.8)
92.4 (9.7)
1.4 (−4.0, 6.9)
0.61

Social-Emotional Standardised Scorea
105.8 (15.9)
105.4 (16.2)
0.4 (−8.5, 9.3)
0.93

Adaptive Behaviour Standardised Scorea
105.2 (15.2)
103.5 (14.9)
1.8 (−6.4, 10.0)
0.67

Cognitive scoreb <85
1 (3.7)
0 (0.0)
N/A
>0.99

Cognitive scoreb <70
1 (3.7)
0 (0.0)
N/A
>0.99

Language scoreb <85
3 (11.1)
3 (11.5)
N/A
>0.99

Language scoreb <70
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
N/A
N/A

Motor scoreb <85
2 (7.4)
5 (19.2)
N/A
0.25

Motor scoreb <70
1 (3.7)
0 (0.0)
N/A
>0.99

CI confidence interval, N/A not applicable
aThe data are presented as mean (standard deviation), and the treatment effect is the difference in means
bThe data are presented as number (percentage)


---

## Page 6

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 6 of 9

*[Image]*

Fig. 2 Median urinary iodine concentration of women. GA
gestational age

13 % of the original cohort selected for developmental as-
sessment in one of the studies [23]. Thus, the results are
likely to be subject to bias. Currently there is a lack of evi-
dence from RCTs investigating the effect of iodine supple-
mentation in pregnancy on childhood development in
populations of mild to moderate iodine deficiency. Find-
ings from cohort studies investigating the relationship be-
tween mild iodine deficiency in pregnancy, defined as
maternal UIC of less than 150 μg/l, and neurodevelop-
mental outcomes of children are inconsistent. Whereas
two cohort studies showed that mild to moderate mater-
nal iodine deficiency in early pregnancy was associated
with lower IQ [24] and reduced educational outcomes
[25], other cohort studies showed no difference in the de-
velopmental outcomes of children between mothers who
had mild to moderate iodine deficiency or iodine suffi-
ciency [5, 26].

question of whether iodine supplementation in pregnancy
is required over and above the mandatory iodine fortifica-
tion in Australia remains unanswered.

The mean cognitive and language scores of the chil-
dren in our study are comparable to a large sample of
children (the DOMInO study [27]) prior to mandatory
iodine fortification of bread in Australia. The mean com-
posite motor score of children in our study is approxi-
mately half a standard deviation below the population
mean and is considerably lower than the children in the
DOMInO study [27]. Our study sample is unlikely to be
representative of the general population, and this may
partly explain the lower motor score, although the effect
of mandatory iodine fortification in Australia on child
development is unknown. A recent larger Spanish co-
hort study (>1500 mother-and-child pairs) in regions of
iodine sufficiency showed that maternal intake of multi-
vitamin supplements containing at least 150 μg of iod-
ine per day was associated with an increased risk of
Bayley motor score of less than 85 in children at 1 year
of age compared with iodine supplements containing
less than 100 μg per day [5]. This suggests that

Despite the small sample size, our findings are consist-
ent with the only two published RCTs conducted in re-
gions of severe iodine deficiency more than three decades
ago [21, 22], which showed no difference in IQ or cog-
nitive development of children between the iodine-
supplemented and the control groups in the absence of
overt iodine deficiency (i.e., cretinism). Concerns that mild
iodine deficiency may lead to cognitive impairment were
based largely on two non-randomised intervention studies
which showed that children whose mothers commenced
iodine supplements in the first trimester had better neuro-
development than children whose mothers took iodine
supplements in the third trimester [23] or no supplements
in pregnancy [4]. However, both studies have major meth-
odological limitations and small sample sizes, with only

Table 3 Biomarkers of iodine status

Iodine
Placebo
Effect (95 % CI)
P value

Cord blood
n = 19
n = 22

Free triiodothyronine, pmol/la
2.3 (0.4)
2.3 (0.6)
0.0 (−0.4, 0.3)
0.81

Free thyroxine, pmol/la
14.4 (2.1)
13.8 (2.3)
0.6 (−0.9, 2.2)
0.40

Thyroid-stimulating hormone, mIU/lb
8.2 (5.9–13.5)
6.6 (4.5–9.6)
N/A
0.25

Thyroglobulin, μg/lb
73.0 (48.0–100.0)
64.0 (44.0–121.0)
N/A
0.66

(n = 28)
(n = 29)

Newborn TSH, mIU/la
2.1 (1.0)
2.2 (1.2)
−0.1 (−0.7, 0.5)
0.79

Newborn TSH > 5c
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
N/A
N/A

(n = 20)
(n = 25)

Breast milk iodine at 6 weeks’ post-partum, μg/lb
106.0 (84.0–146.0)
124.0 (76.0–155.0)
N/A
0.74

CI confidence interval, N/A not applicable, TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone
aData are presented as mean (standard deviation), and the treatment effect is the difference in means
bData are presented as median (interquartile range)
cData are presented as number (percentage)


---

## Page 7

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 7 of 9

Table 4 Pregnancy and neonatal outcomes

Iodine
Placebo
Treatment effect (95 % CI)
P value

Pregnancy outcome
n = 29
n = 29

Miscarriagea
1 (3.5)
0 (0.0)
N/A
>0.99

Stillbirtha
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
N/A
N/A

Caesarean sectiona
9 (32.1)
5 (17.2)
N/A
0.19

Post-term inductiona
3 (10.7)
4 (13.8)
N/A
>0.99

Gestational diabetesa
1 (3.6)
2 (6.9)
N/A
>0.99

Pregnancy-induced hypertensiona
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
N/A
N/A

Pre-eclampsiaa
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
N/A
N/A

Antenatal hospital admissiona
6 (22.2)
7 (24.1)
N/A
0.87

Neonatal outcome
n = 28
n = 29

GA at birth, weeksb
39.3 (37.8 – 40.4)
39.7 (39.3 – 40.3)
N/A
0.23

Preterm birth, GA < 37 weeksa
5 (17.9)
4 (13.8)
N/A
0.73

Birth weight, gc
3325.4 (474.7)
3204.3 (689.4)
121.1 (−194.2, 436.3)
0.45

Birth length, cmc
49.4 (2.3)
48.7 (3.3)
0.7 (−0.9, 2.2)
0.37

Birth head circumference, cmc
34.6 (1.3)
33.9 (2.2)
0.7 (−0.3, 1.7)
0.15

Placental weight, gc
533.5 (136.2)
514.4 (129.5)
19.1 (−114.9, 153.2)
0.77

Low birth weight, <2500 ga
1 (3.6)
3 (10.3)
N/A
0.61

SGAa
3 (10.7)
2 (6.9)
N/A
0.67

LGAa
2 (7.1)
4 (13.8)
N/A
0.67

Major congenital abnormalitya
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
N/A
N/A

Neonatal complicationa
5 (17.9)
5 (17.2)
N/A
>0.99

Admission to NICUa
0 (0.0)
2 (6.9)
N/A
0.49

Neonatal deatha
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
N/A
N/A

CI confidence interval, N/A not applicable, GA gestational age, SGA small for gestational age, LGA large for gestational age, NICU neonatal intensive care unit
aData are presented as number (percentage)
bData are presented as median (interquartile range)
cData are presented as mean (standard deviation)

potential adverse effects of iodine supplementation in
pregnancy at the recommended dose of 150 μg/d in re-
gions
of
iodine
sufficiency
like
Australia
post-
mandatory iodine fortification cannot be excluded in
the absence of quality RCTs.

Conclusions
There are widespread recommendations for routine iod-
ine supplementation in pregnancy, yet the efficacy and
safety of routine iodine supplementation in pregnancy in
a population with mild iodine deficiency or iodine suffi-
ciency remain unclear. Although placebo-controlled ran-
domised trials in such populations are viewed by some
as unethical, conversely recommendations made in the
absence of quality evidence also raise issues of ethical re-
sponsibility for clinicians and may result in lower com-
pliance with such recommendations. A definitive RCT
with an adequate sample size is warranted to provide the
rigorous evidence necessary to inform clinical practice
and public health policy in order to provide the best care
for pregnant women and optimal growth and develop-
ment of their children.

Abbreviations
Bayley-III: Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, third edition;
CI: Confidence interval; DASS: Depression Anxiety Stress Scale; fT3: Free

We observed no differences in markers of thyroid func-
tion in cord blood or newborns between the groups, and
this is consistent with findings from systematic reviews of
RCTs [3, 28] in regions of mild to moderate iodine defi-
ciency where the majority of the trials found no differ-
ences in thyroid hormone concentration between the
iodine-supplemented and the control groups. This is in
contrast to RCTs in the regions of severe iodine deficiency
and suggests that pregnant women in regions of mild to
moderate iodine deficiency are able to maintain adequate
thyroid hormone production to meet increased require-
ments in pregnancy, and this may partly explain the lack
of benefit of iodine supplementation in pregnancy on
child development observed in our study.


---

## Page 8

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 8 of 9

triiodothyronine; fT4: Free thyroxine; IQ: Intelligence quotient; MD: Mean
difference; NHMRC: National Health and Medical Research Council;
RCT: Randomised controlled trial; SF-36: 36-Item Short Form Health Survey;
Tg: Thyroglobulin; TSH: Thyroid-stimulating hormone; UIC: Urinary iodine
concentration; WHO: World Health Organization.

Competing interests
MM received honoraria for scientific advisory board contributions to Fonterra
(Auckland, New Zealand) and the Nestlé Nutrition Institute (Vevey, Switzerland).
AJM received honoraria from the Nestlé Nutrition Institute. All honoraria are
paid to the Women’s & Children’s Health Research Institute to support
continuing education activities for students and postgraduates. The other
authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
SJZ conceived and designed the study, carried out data acquisition, drafted
the manuscript and was responsible for managing the study in the Adelaide
sites. SAS conceived and designed the study, contributed to the management
of the study and would be responsible for managing the study sites in New
Zealand if the trial was carried out as planned. PR designed the study,
performed data analysis and contributed to the management of the study.
LWD provided input in the design of the developmental assessment. PJA
provided input in the design of the developmental assessment. LK provided
obstetrics input in the design of the study and would be responsible for
managing the study in the Melbourne site if the trial was carried out as
planned. AJM provided input in the assessment of neonatal outcomes and
complications. LNY performed data analysis and contributed to monitoring the
progress of the study. MM conceived and designed the study, supervised
data acquisition and was responsible for the overall management of the
study. All authors were involved in interpretation of the data and revision
of the manuscript and read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
This study was funded by the NHMRC of Australia (grant #626800). Data
collection, analysis and interpretation were conducted independently of the
funding body. The Women’s & Children’s Health Research Institute provided
infrastructure support. We thank Jennie Louise for her assistance with statistical
analysis. MM is supported by an NHMRC Principal Research Fellowship
(#1061704). PJA is supported by an NHMRC Senior Research Fellowship
(#628371). LNY is supported by an NHMRC Early Career Research
Fellowship (#1052388).

Author details
1Women’s & Children’s Health Research Institute, 72 King William Road, North
Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia. 2School of Agriculture, Food & Wine, University
of Adelaide, Waite Campus, Waite Road, Urrbrae, SA 5064, Australia.
3Department of Human Nutrition, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin
9054, New Zealand. 4School of Population Health, University of Adelaide, 178
North Terrace, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. 5Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Royal Women’s Hospital, Cnr of Flemington Road and Grattan
Street, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia. 6Clinical
Sciences, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Flemington Road,
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia. 7Department of Paediatrics, University of
Melbourne, 50 Flemington Road, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia. 8Women’s
and Children’s Health Network, 72 King William Road, North, Adelaide, SA
5006, Australia. 9School of Paediatrics & Reproductive Health, University of
Adelaide, Frome Road, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. 10South Australian Health
and Medical Research Institute, North Terrace, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia.

Received: 17 June 2015 Accepted: 24 November 2015

*[Image]*

References
1.
Hetzel BS, Potter BJ, Dulberg EM. The iodine deficiency disorders: nature,
pathogenesis and epidemiology. World Rev Nutr Diet. 1990;62:59–119.
2.
Delange F. Iodine requirements during pregnancy, lactation and the
neonatal period and indicators of optimal iodine nutrition. Public Health
Nutr. 2007;10:1571–80. Discussion 1581–3.
3.
Zhou SJ, Anderson AJ, Gibson RA, Makrides M. Effect of iodine
supplementation in pregnancy on child development and other clinical

outcomes: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin
Nutr. 2013;98:1241–54.
4.
Velasco I, Carreira M, Santiago P, Muela JA, Garcia-Fuentes E, Sanchez-
Munoz B, et al. Effect of iodine prophylaxis during pregnancy on
neurocognitive development of children during the first two years of life. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94:3234–41.
5.
Rebagliato M, Murcia M, Alvarez-Pedrerol M, Espada M, Fernandez-Somoano A,
Lertxundi N, et al. Iodine Supplementation During Pregnancy and Infant
Neuropsychological Development: INMA Mother and Child Cohort Study. Am
J Epidemiol. 2013;177:944–53.
6.
Lazarus J, Brown RS, Daumerie C, Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A, Negro R, Vaidya B.
2014 European thyroid association guidelines for the management of subclinical
hypothyroidism in pregnancy and in children. Eur Thyroid J. 2014;3:76–94.
7.
Stagnaro-Green A, Abalovich M, Alexander E, Azizi F, Mestman J, Negro R,
et al. Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the diagnosis and
management of thyroid disease during pregnancy and postpartum. Thyroid.
2011;21:1081–125.
8.
World Health Organisation, UNICEF. Reaching Optimal Iodine Nutrition in
Pregnant and Lactating Women and Young Children. 2007 [cited 2015 06/
02/2015]; Available from: http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/
micronutrients/WHOStatement__IDD_pregnancy.pdf.
9.
National Health & Medical Research Council. Iodine supplementation for
pregnant and breastfeeding women. Canberra, Australia: National Health &
Medical Research Council; 2010.
10.
Australian Population Health Development Principal Committee. The
prevalence and severity of iodine deficiency in Australia. Report
commissioned by the Australian Health Ministers Advisory Committee.
Canberra, Australia; 2007. Available from: http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/
code/proposals/documents/The%20prevalence%20and%20severity
%20of%20iodine%20deficiency%20in%20Australia%2013%20Dec%202007.pdf.
11.
Bayley N. Bayley scales of infant and toddler development. 3rd ed. San
Antonio, TX: Pearson Education, Inc.; 2006.
12.
Roberts G, Anderson PJ, Doyle LW, Victorian Infant Collaborative Study
Group. The stability of the diagnosis of developmental disability between
ages 2 and 8 in a geographic cohort of very preterm children born in 1997.
Arch Dis Child. 2010;95:786–90.
13.
Ohashi T, Yamaki M, Pandav CS, Karmarkar MG, Irie M. Simple microplate
method for determination of urinary iodine. Clin Chem. 2000;46:529–36.
14.
Huynh D, Zhou SJ, Gibson R, Palmer L, Muhlhausler B. Validation of an optimized
method for the determination of iodine in human breast milk by inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICPMS) after tetramethylammonium
hydroxide extraction. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2015;29:75–82.
15.
Roberts CL, Lancaster PA. Australian national birthweight percentiles by
gestational age. Med J Aust. 1999;170:114–8.
16.
Ware JE, Kosinski M, Gandek B. SF-36 health survey: manual and
interpretation guide. Lincoln, RI: Quality Metric; 2005.
17.
Henry JD, Crawford JR. The short-form version of the Depression Anxiety
Stress Scales (DASS-21): construct validity and normative data in a large
non-clinical sample. Br J Clin Psychol. 2005;44:227–39.
18.
Carpenter DO. Effects of metals on the nervous system of humans and
animals. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 2001;14:209–18.
19.
Walter T, Lozoff B. Prevention of iron-deficiency anemia: comparison of
high- and low-iron formulas in term healthy infants after six months of life.
J Pediatr. 1998;132:635.
20.
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 4364.0.55.006 - Australian Health Survey:
Biomedical Results for Nutrients 2011–12. Sydney, Australia: Australian Bureau
of Statistics; 2014. Available from: http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/
Lookup/4364.0.55.006Chapter1202011-12.
21.
Kevany J, Fierro-Benitez R, Pretell EA, Stanbury JB. Prophylaxis and treatment
of endemic goiter with iodized oil in rural Ecuador and Peru. Am J Clin
Nutr. 1969;22:1597–607.
22.
Pharoah PO, Buttfield IH, Hetzel BS. Neurological damage to the fetus resulting
from severe iodine deficiency during pregnancy. Lancet. 1971;1:308–10.
23.
Berbel P, Mestre JL, Santamaria A, Palazon I, Franco A, Graells M, et al. Delayed
neurobehavioral development in children born to pregnant women with mild
hypothyroxinemia during the first month of gestation: the importance of early
iodine supplementation. Thyroid. 2009;19:511–9.
24.
Bath SC, Steer CD, Golding J, Emmett P, Rayman MP. Effect of inadequate
iodine status in UK pregnant women on cognitive outcomes in their
children: results from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children
(ALSPAC). Lancet. 2013;382:331–7.


---

## Page 9

Zhou et al. Trials  (2015) 16:563 
Page 9 of 9

25.
Hynes KL, Otahal P, Hay I, Burgess JR. Mild iodine deficiency during
pregnancy is associated with reduced educational outcomes in the
offspring: 9-year follow-up of the gestational iodine cohort. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:1954–62.
26.
Ghassabian A, Steenweg-de Graaff J, Peeters RP, Ross HA, Jaddoe VW,
Hofman A, et al. Maternal urinary iodine concentration in pregnancy and
children’s cognition: results from a population-based birth cohort in an
iodine-sufficient area. BMJ Open. 2014;4:e005520.
27.
Makrides M, Gibson RA, McPhee AJ, Yelland L, Quinlivan J, Ryan P. Effect of
DHA supplementation during pregnancy on maternal depression and
neurodevelopment of young children: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2010;304:1675–83.
28.
Zimmermann MB. Iodine deficiency in pregnancy and the effects of
maternal iodine supplementation on the offspring: a review. Am J Clin Nutr.
2009;89:668S–72.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central 
and we will help you at every step:

•  We accept pre-submission inquiries 

•  Our selector tool helps you to ﬁnd the most relevant journal

•  We provide round the clock customer support 

•  Convenient online submission

•  Thorough peer review

•  Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services 

•  Maximum visibility for your research

Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit


---
