
## Page 1

*[Image]*

African Journal of Primary Health Care & Family Medicine 
ISSN: (Online) 2071-2936, (Print) 2071-2928

Page 1 of 10
Original Research

The effect of phlebotomy training on blood 
sample rejection and phlebotomy knowledge 
of primary health care providers in Cape Town: 


A quasi-experimental study

*[Image]*

Authors:
Mumtaz Abbas1

Background: There is an increasing amount of blood sample rejection at primary health care 
facilities (PHCFs), impacting negatively the staff, facility, patient and laboratory costs.

Fidele K. Mukinda2

Mosedi Namane3

Aim: The primary objective was to determine the rejection rate and reasons for blood sample 
rejection at four PHCFs before and after a phlebotomy training programme. The secondary 
objective was to determine whether phlebotomy training improved knowledge among 
primary health care providers (HCPs) and to develop a tool for blood sample acceptability.

Affiliations:
1Department of Family 
Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Cape Town, 
South Africa

Study setting: Two community health centres (CHCs) and two community day centres (CDCs) 
in Cape Town.

Methods: A quasi-experimental study design (before and after a phlebotomy training 
programme).

2Centre for Health Systems 
and Services Research and 
Development (CHSSRD), 
Department of 
Interdisciplinary Health 
Sciences, Stellenbosch 
University, South Africa

3Vanguard Community Heath 
Centre and Department of 
Family Medicine and Public 
Health, University of Cape 
Town, South Africa

Results: The sample rejection rate was 0.79% (n = 60) at CHC A, 1.13% (n = 45) at CHC B, 1.64% 
(n = 38) at CDC C and 1.36% (n = 8) at CDC D pre-training. The rejection rate remained 
approximately the same post-training ( p > 0.05). The same phlebotomy questionnaire was 
administered pre- and post-training to HCPs. The average score increased from 63% (95% CI 
6.97‒17.03) to 96% (95% CI 16.91‒20.09) at CHC A ( p = 0.039), 58% (95% CI 9.09‒14.91) to 93% 
(95% CI 17.64‒18.76) at CHC B ( p = 0.006), 60% (95% CI 8.84‒13.13) to 97% (95% CI 16.14‒19.29) 
at CDC C ( p = 0.001) and 63% (95% CI 9.81‒13.33) to 97% (95% CI 18.08‒19.07) at CDC D 
( p = 0.001).

Conclusion: There is no statistically significant improvement in the rejection rate of blood 
samples ( p > 0.05) post-training despite knowledge improving in all HCPs ( p < 0.05).

Corresponding author:
Mumtaz Abbas,
mumtazabbas@ymail.com

Introduction

Dates:
Received: 02 July 2016
Accepted: 18 Nov. 2016
Published: 13 Apr. 2017

There is an increasing amount of blood sample rejection at primary health care facilities (PHCFs) 
which impacts negatively the staff, facility, patient and laboratory and results in high health care 
costs. Patient care and safety has become increasingly more important in laboratory medicine.1 
Clinical laboratories have a big role to play in the management and diagnosis of patients.2 Clinical 
laboratories are striving to reduce the rejection rate of unsuitable blood samples and to provide an 
excellent level of care with more attention on patient care and safety.3,4

How to cite this article:
Abbas M, Mukinda FK, 
Namane M. The effect of 
phlebotomy training on 
blood sample rejection and 
phlebotomy knowledge of 
primary health care providers 
in Cape Town: A quasi-
experimental study. Afr J Prm 
Health Care Fam Med. 
2017;9(1), a1242. https://doi.
org/10.4102/phcfm.
v9i1.1242

Approximately 70% – 80% of diagnoses are made in conjunction with laboratory tests. A delay in 
laboratory test results may result in delayed diagnoses, inappropriate or unnecessary treatment, 
increased risk to patient safety, high health care costs and waste of time.5 The National Health 
Laboratory Service (NHLS) provides laboratory services to all public sector hospitals in South Africa, 
and certain requirements are necessary before a sample can be successfully processed. There are three 
main phases to the testing of blood samples at the laboratory and these include the preanalytical, 
analytical and post-analytical phase. The preanalytical phase includes all steps from the time the 
clinician orders a test to the time the test is analysed; the analytical phase refers to the analysis of the 
sample; and the post-analytical phase refers to the reporting and interpretation of the test result.6

Read online:

Read online:

Studies reported the following preanalytical errors: patient identification (labelling errors, no test 
specified on request form, illegible request, no ward specified); sample collection (clotting, 

Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.

Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.

Copyright: © 2017. The Authors. Licensee: AOSIS. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution License.

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 2

Page 2 of 10
Original Research

insufficient blood volume, incorrect sample tube, haemolysis); 
and sample transport (storage conditions i.e. incorrect 
temperature, sample lost or not received by the laboratory).1,3

The quality of a service can be determined by evaluating the 
success with which a service is delivered.16 Procedures that 
are deemed of high volume, high risk and expensive should 
be monitored by laboratories.17 In primary health care centres, 
phlebotomy is considered a high volume and high risk 
procedure in terms of the volume of patients that require 
blood drawn as well as the dangers of needle stick injuries to 
health care providers (HCPs) and the consequences of 
incorrect phlebotomy technique.

Majority of blood samples are rejected as a result of 
preanalytical errors, and this accounts for up to 70% of 
laboratory errors.7,8,9 The prevalence of preanalytical problems 
ranged between 0.2% and 0.75% with the most common 
errors being haemolysis, clotting, insufficient blood volume, 
wrong sample tube and misidentification.10 Six to 12% of 
patients received inappropriate care because of laboratory 
errors, with up to 30% of errors resulting in patient discomfort, 
high hospital/health care costs and subjecting patients to re-
sampling blood.11

Phlebotomy can also be of high cost if blood samples 
are  rejected because of various reasons. It was found that 
blood samples drawn by trained laboratory personnel/
phlebotomists have lower blood sample rejection rates when 
compared to HCPs who have not received training (99.6% 
success vs 97.9%; p = 0.002). Even with trained personnel, 
haemolysis, clotting and insufficient blood volume were the 
main causes for blood sample rejection.10

A pilot audit at Vanguard Community Health Centre (CHC) 
in August 2012 (unpublished) showed that blood sample 
rejection is predominantly related to incorrect phlebotomy 
technique. This contributes significantly to preanalytical 
errors, as primary health care nurses do not receive formal 
phlebotomy training as part of their undergraduate training.

Laboratory medicine plays a vital role in everyday clinical 
practice as well as in the long term follow-up of our patients. 
Only appropriate samples received by the laboratory can be 
analysed.18 Programmes that evaluated laboratory quality 
have shown blood sample rejection rates vary from 0.3% in 
outpatient departments to 0.8% in hospital inpatients.10

In a recent retrospective audit conducted at Tygerberg Hospital 
in Cape Town, 481 of 32  910 samples (1.46%) were rejected 
during the 2-week study period.1 The main reasons for sample 
rejection were clotting (30%) and inadequate sample volume 
(22%).1 Over half the samples were repeated and the average 
time for the sample to reach the laboratory was 5 days.

A study conducted at a government hospital in Bhavnagar 
showed that incorrect phlebotomy technique was the main 
reason for blood sample rejection. In order to improve the 
quality of samples that reach the laboratory, the authors of 
the above study suggest that phlebotomists and laboratory 
staff develop a manual on proper phlebotomy technique for 
HCPs.18

Aims and objectives

Haemolysis refers to the release of haemoglobin and 
intracellular components from erythrocytes into the 
surrounding plasma when the cell membrane is either 
damaged or disrupted.12 Haemolysis accounts for 40% – 70% 
of all unsuitable blood samples sent to the laboratory.12 Not 
all haemolysed samples are rejected by the laboratory, many 
samples can still be processed successfully except for 
electrolytes such as potassium and other tests that are 
influenced by haemolysis.1

The aim was to assess the effect of phlebotomy training on 
blood sample rejection rate and knowledge among primary 
HCPs at four facilities in Cape Town.

The primary objective of this study was to determine the 
rejection rate and reasons for blood sample rejection at four 
selected PHCFs pre- and post-phlebotomy training. The 
secondary objective was to determine whether phlebotomy 
training improved phlebotomy knowledge among primary 
HCPs and to develop a tool for blood sample acceptability.

The low rate of repeating blood samples of rejected samples 
and the delay in repeating the blood sample are also a concern 
as laboratory results can influence clinical decisions and 
inherent patient care.13 Turnaround times in repeating 
rejected samples can improve with access to the NHLS DISA 
Laboratory (DISALAB) on site where clinicians can check 
results during the current hospital visit.1

Study design and methods
Study design

The evaluation of the reasons for blood sample rejection and 
its impact on health care costs as well as costs to the staff and 
most importantly to the patient is a form of assessing health 
systems performance. This provides role players in the health 
system with policy options and practical information that 
can be used to improve the health care system performance.14 
One of the goals in strengthening health care systems in 
South Africa is to improve the functioning of clinical 
laboratories.15 This can be done by ensuring that good quality 
samples reach the laboratory and that staff are adequately 
trained by laboratory personnel on all aspects of phlebotomy 
that is required to ensure a sample of good quality.

We performed a quasi-experimental study (before and after a 
phlebotomy training programme). We measured HCPs’ 
knowledge on phlebotomy technique and laboratory blood 
sample rejection rates before and after a phlebotomy training 
programme. All blood samples received and rejected by the 
NHLS during the month of May 2014 (pre-training) and July 
2014 (post-training) were included in the study. A 2-hour 
Phlebotomy training programme was conducted at each 
facility during the month of June 2014. Phlebotomy 

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 3

Page 3 of 10
Original Research

knowledge pre- and post-phlebotomy training was assessed 
on the same day with each HCP completing the same 
phlebotomy questionnaire pre- and post-training.

seven from CDC C and four from CDC D. These HCPs were 
trained as trainers and were expected to train other HCPs at 
their respective facilities.

Data collection

Any sample processed by the laboratory that was not blood 
was excluded from the study.

Intervention

The data for May 2014 (pre-training) and July 2014 (post-
training) were extracted from the NHLS DISALAB at the 
data warehouse in Johannesburg. The data were captured 
onto Microsoft® Excel®. The variables extracted included the 
total number of routine blood samples performed, the 
number of blood samples rejected, the name of the test that 
was rejected (e.g. full blood count) and the reason for rejecting 
a blood sample (e.g. clotted sample).

The phlebotomy training programme was developed based 
on the ‘NHLS Western Cape Regional Laboratories Specimen 
Sampling Manual 2013’. The programme was developed 
using the information in the manual regarding health and 
safety measures of phlebotomy, proper venepuncture 
technique, the correct way to handle blood samples and 
phlebotomy equipment such as needles and syringes, the 
correct storage and transport of blood samples as well as the 
correct completion of the NHLS sample request form.

Data from the data capture sheets were captured onto 
Microsoft Excel and was backed up on an external USB 
storage device, which was only accessible to the principal 
investigator and the research team. The data were encrypted 
and password protected within Microsoft Excel.

HCPs were assigned to receive phlebotomy training as our 
intervention of interest. The phlebotomy training session was 
approximately 2 hours long and was conducted at each of the 
four facilities (CHC A, CHC B, community day centre [CDC] 
C and CDC D) at a pre-determined day and time during the 
month of June 2014. All HCPs who attended the training 
session received a copy of the ‘NHLS Western Cape Regional 
Laboratories Specimen Sampling Manual 2013’.

A questionnaire with 20 closed ended questions (see 
Appendix A) was developed based on the NHLS phlebotomy 
training manual 2013 and input from experts working in 
PHCFs. The questionnaire was piloted by staff ordering 
blood investigations or involved in phlebotomy at Vanguard 
CHC and amended where necessary. The questionnaire was 
either in English or Afrikaans.

Data analysis

The same pre- and post-training questionnaires were 
completed by each HCP in attendance at the training to 
assess if their knowledge had improved post-training. 
There was no pass mark; however, pre- and post-training 
scores determined whether knowledge around phlebotomy 
increased.

Setting

STATISTICATM version 14 was used for data analysis. The 
summary statistics was used to describe the variables. A test 
of proportion was performed to assess the effect of the 
intervention on the rejection rate of blood samples before and 
after training. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test and the paired 
t-test were used to analyse the pre- and post-training 
questionnaire data. A p-value of < 0.05 represented statistical 
significance.

The study was a multicentre study performed at four facilities 
in Cape Town, two 24-hour CHCs (CHC A and B) and two 
8-hour CDCs (CDC C and D).

Results

A community health facility (CHC and CDC) is a public 
PHCF funded by the government. It provides health care that 
covers a range of health promotion, disease prevention, 
curative and rehabilitative services to the community.19,20

The facilities included CHC A and B, which were large 24-
hour facilities serving between 150  000 and 300  000 
patients,21,22 and CDC C and D, which were smaller 8-hour 
facilities serving between 30 000 and 35 000 patients.23

Study population and sampling strategy

Approximately 6–10 HCPs participated at these different 
sites. There were 23 study participants (Table 1) who attended 
the phlebotomy training session across all the facilities. The 
age, sex and level of phlebotomy experience of each HCP 
who attended the training were recorded. There were no 
exclusion criteria for the above variables of age, sex and level 
of experience. Most of the HCPs were aged between 30 and 
50 years. There was only 1 male participant and 22 females. 
There were 3 student nurses, 17 nurses and only 3 doctors. 
The phlebotomy experience across participants varied, with 
nine participants having less than 5 years’ experience, five 
having 5–10 years’ experience and nine having more than 30 
years’ experience.

The HCPs for the 2-hour phlebotomy training session were 
recruited by seeking their permission through the assistance 
of the facility managers and family physicians of the four 
facilities. There was a total of 23 HCPs who attended the 
training programme. Convenience sampling of HCPs was 
done. There were five HCPs from CHC A, seven from CHC B, 

Box 1 describes the tool that was developed to facilitate the 
phlebotomy training, listing all the criteria for laboratory 
blood sample acceptability.

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 4

Page 4 of 10
Original Research

during July 2014 (post-training): 10 218 from CHC A, 4114 
from CHC B, 2279 from CDC C and 630 from CDC D.

The total number of blood samples included in the 
study  during May 2014 (pre-training): 7557 from CHC 
A, 3973 from CHC B, 2321 from CDC C and 589 from CDC D. 
The total number of blood samples included in the  study 

TABLE 1: Demographic data of study participants across all four clinics.

Category
Participants n (%)

Rank

 Student nurse
3 (13)

 Nurse
17 (74)

During the month of May 2014 (Table 2): 60 of 7557 blood 
samples (0.79%) were rejected pre-training at CHC A and 79 
of 10  218 blood samples (0.77%) post-training ( p = 0.971). 
CHC A is the largest of the four facilities. Only 8 of 589 blood 
samples (1.36%) were rejected pre-training at CDC D and 7 of 
630 blood samples (1.11%) post-training ( p = 0.696). CDC D is 
the smallest of the four facilities.

 Doctor
3 (13)

Sex

 Male
1 (5)

 Female
22 (95)

Age

 < 30 years
7 (30)

 30–50 years
9 (39)

 > 50 years
5 (22)

 Unknown
2 (9)

Phlebotomy experience

 < 5 years
9 (39)

 5–10 years
5 (22)

 > 10 years
9 (39)

Box 1: ABBAS tool©.

1. REQUEST FORM

• Name of facility

• Diagnosis

• Name of requesting doctor

• Date and time of sample collection

The reasons for blood sample rejection were grouped into 
four 
main 
categories 
including 
technique 
related, 
knowledge related, request form related and unaccountable 
preanalytical errors. Technique-related errors include 
samples that were clotted or haemolysed. Knowledge 
related errors include errors because of incorrect blood 
volume or the incorrect blood sample tube used. Request 
form errors include any error in the completion of the 
request form such as no patient details indicated, illegible 
requests, name on sample tube and request form unmatched, 
no test requested or an unlabelled sample. Unaccountable 
preanalytical errors include all errors that are not accounted 
for by the above but that occur in the preanalytical phase 
of  laboratory testing of blood samples. These include 
samples with missing reasons for rejection, samples older 
than 3 days, samples that leaked in transit as well as samples 
that were not received by the laboratory.

• HCP who took sample

• Test specified on request form

• Legible request

• Patient’s details (first name & surname, folder no, age/DOB, sex)

• Correct sample type for test requested

• Doctor’s signature

• INR sample – working contact number of patient or doctor

2. SAMPLE

• Tube not expired (check expiry date on tube)/cracked

• Correct colour tube

Table 3 shows a detailed summary of rejection rates and 
related reasons by facility. At CHC A, many samples were 
rejected because of clotting, 20 (0.26%) were rejected pre-
training and 16 (0.16%) post-training (Table 3). Request form 
errors improved post-training from 11 (0.15%) pre-training to 
8 (0.08%) post-training. There was an increase in the rejection 
rate of samples because of unaccountable preanalytical errors, 
17 (0.22%) pre-training to 27 (0.26%) post-training (Figure 1).

• Labelled sample (sticker placed lengthwise, NOT covering cap):

  First name and surname, folder number OR sticker if available

• Do not pre-label before drawing blood

• Patient’s name on form and sample matching

• Correct volume of blood (check volume required on tube)

• Gentle mixing of sample 8–10 times

• Sample tubes kept at room temperature, NO direct sunlight

At CHC B, knowledge related errors reduced from 16 (0.40%) 
rejected samples pre-training to 9 (0.22%). Twelve samples 
(0.16%) were rejected because of ‘incorrect sample tube’. This 
was reduced by half (0.15%) post-training. However, all other 
reasons for blood sample rejection increased post-training 
(Figure 2).

• Samples kept at room temperature, IN FRIDGE if after hours

3. SAMPLE TRANSPORT

• Sealed packet

• Blood sample/s and request form of index patient in one packet

ABBAS tool© compiled by: Drs Abbas, Namane and Mukinda.

At CDC C, many samples were rejected because of clotting 
pre- and post-training with the rejection rate increasing post-
training. Knowledge related errors reduced from five (0.02%) 

TABLE 2: Rejection rate of blood samples before and after the phlebotomy training.

Before the phlebotomy training May 2014
After the phlebotomy training July 2014

CHC/CDC
Blood registrations
Blood rejections n (%)
Blood registrations
Blood rejections n (%)
p

A
7557
60 (0.79)
10 218
79 (0.77)
0.876

B
3973
45 (1.13)
4114
48 (1.17)
0.886

C
2321
38 (1.64)
2279
37 (1.62)
0.971

D
589
8 (1.36)
630
7 (1.11)
0.696

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 5

Page 5 of 10
Original Research

TABLE 3: Rejection rate and reasons for blood sample rejection before and after the phlebotomy training by facility.

Reasons for rejection
Before the phlebotomy training May 2014 n (%)
After the phlebotomy training July 2014 n (%)

CHC A
CHC B
CDC C
CDC D
CHC A
CHC B
CDC C
CDC D

Technique related
20 (0.26)
8 (0.20)
15 (0.65)
4 (0.68)
20 (0.20)
15 (0.36)
18 (0.79)
2 (0.32)

- Clotted
20 (0.26)
7 (0.18)
15 (0.65)
4 (0.68)
16 (0.16)
14 (0.34)
16 (0.70)
2 (0.32)

- Haemolysed
0
1 (0.01)
0
0
4 (0.04)
1 (0.02)
2 (0.09)
0

Knowledge related
12 (0.16)
16 (0.40)
5 (0.02)
0
24 (0.23)
9 (0.22)
3 (0.13)
3 (0.48)

- Incorrect blood volume
5 (0.07)
4 (0.10)
2 (0.09)
0
8 (0.08)
3 (0.07)
1 (0.04)
1 (0.16)

- Incorrect sample tube
7 (0.09)
12 (0.30)
3 (0.13)
0
16 (0.16)
6 (0.15)
2 (0.09)
2 (0.32)

Request form errors
11 (0.15)
11 (0.28)
3 (0.13)
0
8 (0.08)
12 (0.29)
6 (0.26)
0

- Name on form and sample unmatched
3 (0.04)
1 (0.03)
1 (0.04)
-
4 (0.04)
4 (0.10)
0
-

- No patient details
1 (0.01)
0
0
-
0
0
0
-

- No test requested
1 (0.01)
3 (0.08)
1 (0.04)
-
2 (0.02)
0
1 (0.04)
-

- Illegible request
1 (0.01)
0
0
-
0
0
0
-

- Unlabelled sample
5 (0.07)
3 (0.08)
0
-
2 (0.02)
5 (0.12)
3 (0.13)
-

- No reason stated
0
4 (0.10)
1 (0.04)
-
0
3 (0.07)
2 (0.09)
-

Unaccountable preanalytical errors
17 (0.22)
10 (0.25)
15 (0.65)
4(0.68)
27 (0.26)
12 (0.29)
10 (0.44)
2 (0.32)

- No reason stated
11 (0.15)
0
0
0
18 (0.18)
0
0
1 (0.16)

- Sample leaked
2 (0.03)
0
0
0
1 (0.01)
1 (0.02)
0
0

- No sample received
1(0.01)
2(0.05)
4(0.17)
4(0.68)
5 (0.05)
6 (0.15)
3 (0.13)
1 (0.16)

- Age of sample > 3 days
3 (0.03)
8 (0.20)
11 (0.04)
0
3 (0.03)
5 (0.12)
7 (0.31)
0

Pre-Training
Post-Training

Pre-Training
Post-Training

0.30

0.79

0.26

0.26

0.23

0.25

0.22

0.65

0.65

0.20

0.20

0.16

0.15

0.44

0.15

0.26

0.08

0.10

Percentage (%)

Percentage (%)

0.22
0.13
0.13

0.05

0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90

0.00

Technique
related
errors

Knowledge
related
errors

Request
form
errors

Unaccountable
pre-analycal
errors

Technique
related
errors

Knowledge
related
errors

Request
form
errors

Unaccountable
pre-analycal
errors

Reasons for blood sample rejec
on

Reasons for blood sample rejec
on

FIGURE 1: The rejection rate at CHC A.

FIGURE 3: The rejection rate at CDC C.

Pre-Training
Post-Training

Pre-Training
Post-Training

0.50

0.68

0.68

0.40

0.36

0.40

0.48

0.28
0.29

0.30

0.25
0.29

0.22

0.20

0.32

0.32

0.20

Percentage (%)

Percentage (%)

0.10

0.0
0.0

0.0

0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80

0.00

Unaccountable
pre-analycal
errors

Technique
related
errors

Knowledge
related
errors

Request
form
errors

Knowledge
related
errors

Request
form
errors

Unaccountable
pre-analycal
errors

Technique
related
errors

Reasons for blood sample rejec
on

Reasons for blood sample rejec
on

FIGURE 2: The rejection rate at CHC B.

FIGURE 4: The rejection rate at CDC D.

CDC D is a smaller 8-hour facility compared to CDC C and 
only had 4 out of 589 (0.68%) samples rejected because of 
clotting pre-training, which was reduced to 2 (0.32%). 
Unaccountable preanalytical errors reduced by half post-
training. There were no request form errors pre- or post-
training (Figure 4).

rejected samples pre-training to three (0.13%). Request form 
errors doubled from three (0.13%) rejected samples pre-
training to six (0.26%). Unaccountable preanalytical errors, 
because of ‘age of sample > 3 days’ also contributed to many 
of the blood sample rejections, 11 (0.04%) rejected samples 
pre-training and 7 (0.31%) post-training (Figure 3).

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 6

Page 6 of 10
Original Research

TABLE 4: Overall rejection rates and related reasons for all facilities combined.

Before the phlebotomy training May 2014
After the phlebotomy training July 2014
P-value and 95% CI

Related reason for rejection
Rejection rate n (%)
Rejection rate n (%)
p
95% CI

Technique related
47 (0.33)
55 (0.32)
0.38
-8 to 4

Knowledge related
33 (0.23)
39 (0.23)
0.74
-14.39 to 11.39

Request form errors
25 (0.17)
26 (0.15)
0.85
-4.23 to 3.73

Unaccountable preanalytical errors
46 (0.32)
51 (0.30)
0.73
-11.59 to 9.09

7

Level of conﬁdence pre-training
Level of conﬁdence post-training

6

5

4

3

Level of conﬁdence

2

1

0

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
P11
P12
P13
P14
P15
P16
P17
P18
P19
P20
P21
P22
P23

Study parcipants across all clinics

FIGURE 5: Level of confidence in phlebotomy across all clinics pre- and post-training using a Likert Scale.

Government of the Western Cape (REF: 2013RP190). The 
study was conducted according to the Declaration of 
Helsinki.

The overall rejection rate, irrespective of facility, showed an 
increase in the rejection rate post-training, which was not 
statistically significant (Table 4).

Discussion

The pre- and post-training questionnaire scores showed an 
improvement in phlebotomy knowledge post-training as the 
average percentage score increased across all clinics. 
The average score increased from 63% (95% CI 6.97‒17.03) to 
96% (95% CI 16.91‒20.09) at CHC A (p = 0.039), 58% (95% CI 
9.09‒14.91) to 93% (95% CI 17.64‒18.76) at CHC B ( p = 0.006), 
60% (95% CI 8.84‒13.13) to 97% (95% CI 16.14‒19.29) at CDC 
C ( p = 0.001) and 63% (95% CI 9.81‒13.33) to 97% (95% CI 
18.08 – 19.07) at CDC D ( p = 0.001).

The study found that an appropriate intervention such as 
phlebotomy training has improved knowledge regarding 
phlebotomy (CHC A, p = 0.039; CHC B, p = 0.006; CDC C, 
p = 0.001; CDC D, p = 0.001). The study results show no 
statistically significant improvement in the rejection rate 
of  blood samples sent to the laboratory by each of the 
four PHCFs (CHC A, p = 0.876; CHC B, p = 0.886; CDC C, 
p = 0.971; CDC D, p = 0.696) post-phlebotomy training. The 
overall rejection rate also showed no statistical significance 
in the rejection rate post-training (technique related errors, 
p = 0.38; knowledge related errors, p = 0.74; request 
form errors, p = 0.85; unaccountable preanalytical errors, 
p = 0.73).

Participants were asked to grade their level of confidence in 
phlebotomy on a Likert scale from 1 to 6, with 1 being ‘not 
confident at all’ and 6 being ‘very confident’. All participants’ 
level of confidence either remained the same or increased 
post-phlebotomy training (Figure 5).

Ethical consideration

This study has been approved by the Health Research 
Ethics Committee (HREC) of the University of Cape Town 
(HREC REF: 549/2013) as well as by the Provincial 

The sample rejection rate was 0.79% at CHC A, 1.13% at CHC B, 
1.64% at CDC C and 1.36% at CDC D pre-training. The rejection 
rates remained approximately the same  post  training. This 
could possibly be explained by other factors not explored in this 
quasi-experimental study. These factors include the phlebotomy 

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 7

Page 7 of 10
Original Research

done. The above recommendation is supported by similar 
audits conducted at other PHCFs.25,26

experience of the primary HCPs, the same group of participants 
who received training were not followed up, and participants 
who did not receive training were involved in phlebotomy post-
training which may have affected the study results.

Conclusion

The 
study 
results 
show 
no 
statistically 
significant 
improvement in the rejection rate of blood samples sent to 
the laboratory by each of the four PHCFs ( p > 0.05) post-
phlebotomy training despite an increase in the knowledge of 
phlebotomy in all HCPs ( p < 0.05).

Acknowledgements

A large number of blood samples in this study were rejected 
because of clotting, which was also seen in a similar study in 
2011 at Tygerberg Hospital.1 Preanalytical errors is a major 
concern for laboratories accounting for up to 70% of 
laboratory errors,4 hence the need for a sustainable 
intervention to improve such errors. However, despite 
haemolysis being a leading cause of blood sample rejection 
accounting for up to 70% of unsuitable samples,12 this was 
not the leading cause of sample rejection in this study. From 
the overall rejection rates (Table 4), the leading cause of 
sample rejection was clotting which is related to phlebotomy 
technique, followed by unaccountable preanalytical errors. It 
is difficult to correct unaccountable preanalytical errors, as 
we do not always know why and how these errors occur.

We would like to acknowledge the NHLS with special 
reference to Mr Mogamed Davids and the Data Warehouse 
in Johannesburg for assisting with accessing data. Sister 
Petersen of the Cape Town NHLS is thanked for assisting 
with phlebotomy training. Dr Tasneem Allie and Dr 
Mireille Porter are thanked for their assistance with data 
analysis.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationship(s) with the NHLS and the four study sites that 
may have inappropriately influenced them in writing this 
article.

Because approximately 60% of clinical decisions are 
influenced by laboratory results,13 an improvement in the 
rejection rate by improving preanalytical errors should 
improve patient care. Apart from the impact that rejected 
blood samples has on patient care in terms of the patient’s 
management, it also has a financial impact on the facility as 
well as causing pain and emotional harm to the patient.24

Authors’ contributions

M.A. was the principal investigator of the study and 
responsible for conception, data acquisition, data analysis 
and drafting of the manuscript. M.N. was the main supervisor 
for the study. F.K.M was the co-supervisor for the study. All 
authors made substantial contributions to the conception, 
design, data analysis and interpretation of the results. All 
authors read and critically revised the draft and approved 
the final manuscript.

It was interesting that there was only 1 male participant out of 
the 23 participants. Only 3 out of 23 participants were doctors. 
This may be because of the high patient volumes and 
insufficient time to attend a 2-hour training programme, or 
they may not feel they will learn something new as phlebotomy 
training is part of the undergraduate training programme as a 
medical student. For each of the 23 participants, the pre- and 
post-training questionnaire scores improved. All participants’ 
level of confidence had improved or remained the same.

References

Strengths and limitations

1.	 Jacobsz LA, Zemlin AE, Roos MJ, Erasmus RT. Chemistry and haematology sample 

rejection and clinical impact in a tertiary laboratory in Cape Town. Clin Chem Lab 
Med. 2011;49(12):2047–2050. https://doi.org/10.1515/CCLM.2011.743

2.	 O’Kane M. The reporting, classification and grading of quality failures in the 

medical laboratory. Clin Chem Acta. 2009;404(1):28–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/​
j.cca.2009.03.023

3.	 Erasmus RT, Zemlin AE. Clinical audit in the laboratory. J Clin Path. 2009;62:593–597. 

https://doi.org/10.1136/jcp.2008.056929

4.	 Sciacovelli L, Plebani M. The IFCC Working Group on laboratory errors and patient 

safety. Clin Chem Acta. 2009;404(1):79–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2009.​
03.025

5.	 Howanitz PJ. Errors in laboratory medicine: Practical lessons to improve patient 

safety. Arch Path Lab. 2005;129(10):1252–1261.

HCPs who did not participate in the training were involved 
in blood sample collection post-training, which may have 
adversely affected the study results. Reasons for some of the 
rejected blood samples were not provided in the NHLS 
database. There is also an underestimation of haemolysis as a 
cause of blood sample rejection as many haemolysed samples 
are still processed and only the potassium is rejected; 
therefore, the rejection rate might be higher than reported on 
in this study.

6.	 Green SF. The cost of poor blood specimen quality and errors in preanalytical 

processes. 
Clin 
Biochem. 
2013;46:1175–1179. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
clinbiochem.2013.06.001

Implications or recommendations

7.	 Lippi G, Guidi GC, Mattiuzzi C, Plebani M. Preanalytical variability: The dark side of 

the moon in laboratory testing. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2006;44(4):358–365. https://
doi.org/10.1515/CCLM.2006.073

8.	 Plebani M, Carraro P. Mistakes and stat laboratory: Types and frequency. Clin 

Chem. 1997;43:1346–1351.

9.	 Szeesi PB, Odum L. Error tracking in a clinical biochemistry laboratory. Clin Chem 

Lab Med. 2009;47(10):1253–1257.

10.	Dale JC, Novis DA. Oupatient phlebotomy success and reasons for specimen 

rejection: A Q-probes study. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2002;126:416–419.

Increased knowledge in phlebotomy does not in itself 
influence practice. We recommend that primary HCPs receive 
phlebotomy training in order to reduce the rejection rate of 
laboratory blood samples and that any training at primary 
level facilities be accompanied by support from managers 
and that regular monitoring and evaluation of systems be 

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 8

Page 8 of 10
Original Research

11.	Lippi G, Guidi GC. Risk management in the preanalytical phase of laboratory 

19.	Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care. Public information [homepage on 

testing. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2007;45:720–727. https://doi.org/10.1515/
CCLM.2007.167

the Internet]. 2013 [cited 2013 Apr 7]. Available from: http://www.health.gov.
on.ca/english/public/contact/chc/chc_mn.html

12.	Lippi G, Blanckaert N, Bonini P, et al. Haemolysis: An overview of the leading cause 

20.	Cullinan K. Health services in South Africa: A basic introduction [homepage on the 

of unsuitable specimens in clinical laboratories. Clin Chem Lab Med. 
2008;46(6):764–772. https://doi.org/10.1515/CCLM.2008.170

Internet]. 2006 [cited 2013 Apr 7]. Available from: http://www.health-e.org.za/
uploaded/cb1f388f3b351708d915c12cfb4fc3cf.pdf

13.	Forsman RW. Why is the laboratory an afterthought for managed care 

21.	Mitchells Plain Community Health Centre, info4africa [homepage on the Internet]. 

organizations? Clin Chem. 1996;42:813–816.

2015 [cited 2015 Dec 24]. Available from: http://search.info4africa.org.za/

14.	Barron P, Buthelezi G, Edwards J, Makhanya N, Palmer N. Health systems research 

22.	Hanover Park Community Health Centre Launches a New ARV (RAP) Clinic 

a manual [homepage on the Internet]. 1997 [cited 2013 Mar 16]. Available from: 
www.healthlink.org.za/uploads/files/hsr_man.pdf

[homepage on the Internet]. 2013 [cited 2015 Dec 24]. Available from: https://
www.westerncape.gov.za/news/hanover-park-community-health-centre-
launches-new-arv-rap-clinic

15.	Health research: Essential link to equity in development [homepage on the 

23.	Heideveld Community Health Centre [homepage on the Internet]. 2015 [cited 

Internet]. 1990 [cited 2013 May 20]. Available from: www.cohred.org/
publications/open-archive/1990-commission-report/

2015 Dec 24]. Available from: http://www.samefoundation.org.za/heideveld-chc/

16.	Berte LM, Nevalainen DE. Quality systems for the laboratory. Bethesda, MD: 

24.	Plebani M. Exploring the iceberg of errors in laboratory medicine. Clin Chem Acta. 

American Association of Blood Banks, 2000; p. 254.

2009;404(1):16–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2009.03.022

17.	2000–2001 Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Pathology and Clinical 

25.	Essel V, van Vuuren U, De Sa A, et al. Auditing chronic disease care: Does it make 

a difference? Afr J Prim Health Care Fam Med. 2015;7(1):1–7. https://doi.
org/10.4102/phcfm.v7i1.753

Laboratory Services. Accreditation policies, standards, intent statements, scoring, 
aggregation rules, decision rules. Oakbrook Terrace, IL: Joint Commission on 
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, 1999; 1–12.

26.	Govender I, Ehrlich R, Van Vuuren U, et al. Clinical audit of diabetes management 

18.	Goswami AP, Roy SS, Goswami NN. Evaluation of specimen rejection rate in 

Haematology Laboratory. J Dent Med Sci. 2014;13(9):1–4.

can improve the quality of care in a resource-limited primary care setting. Int J 
Qual Health Care. 2012;24(6):612–618. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzs063

Appendix starts on the next page →

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 9

Page 9 of 10
Original Research

Appendix 1

8. If a superficial vein is not easily seen/felt, you can:

PHLEBOTOMY QUESTIONAIRE 2013

⃝ Ask the patient to elevate their arm for a few seconds

DEMOGRAPHIC DATA:

⃝ Wash the patient’s hand with cold water

⃝ Tap the vein with one/two fingers and place a warm damp cloth 

onto the vein

⃝ Gently massage the arm from the shoulder to the wrist

Age:………………………………………………….................
Occupation:………………………………………................
Rank:…………………………………………………................
Years of experience in phlebotomy:…………………..

9. When drawing blood, the tourniquet should be placed:

⃝ 1–2cm from the puncture site

Read each question carefully and choose the correct answer. Make 
an ‘x’ in the correct box.

⃝ 5 cm from the puncture site

⃝ 3–4 cm from the puncture site

1. It is important to check your phlebotomy equipment before 
proceeding with drawing blood.

⃝ 6–8 cm from the puncture site

⃝ True

⃝ False

10. The tourniquet should not be left on the arm for more than:

⃝ 2 minutes

⃝ 10 minutes

2. Please circle the number that represents your confidence in 
drawing blood at your facility.

⃝ 5 minutes

Not confident at all	
Very confident
1 2 3 4 5 6

⃝ 30 seconds

11. The angle of insertion of the needle into the patient’s arm 

3. A blood sample, if refrigerated, should be stored at the following 
temperature to preserve the sample integrity.

should be:

⃝ 5–10°C

⃝ 45°

⃝ 2–8°C

⃝ 15–30°

⃝ 1–10°C

⃝ 90°

⃝ 37–38°C

⃝ 10°20°

4. Blood sample tubes should ideally be kept in the fridge.

12. When should the tourniquet be released?

⃝ True

⃝ while the first tube is filling

⃝ False

⃝ 1 min after the last tube is filling

⃝ when the last tube is filling

5. CD4 blood samples once drawn should be kept in the fridge

⃝ immediately after the last tube is filled

⃝ True

⃝ False

13. Choose the correct option:

6. The correct order of draw of blood samples is as follows:

⃝ Blood samples should be mixed vigorously at least 8 times

⃝ purple, yellow, blue, grey

⃝ Blood samples should be mixed gently 8–10 times

⃝ purple, blue, yellow, grey

⃝ Blood samples should be inverted at least once

⃝ blue, purple, yellow, grey

⃝ Blood samples should be shaken to ensure adequate mixing of 

⃝ yellow, blue, grey, purple

the sample

14. Factors that result in haemoconcentration include all of the 

7. Choose the correct option.
The following areas should be avoided when drawing blood except:

⃝ scars from burns and previous surgery

following:
prolonged tourniquet time, squeezing a puncture site, intravenous 
therapy

⃝ veins from the antecubital fossa

⃝ True

⃝ blood from a haematoma

⃝ False

⃝ site where an intravenous line is placed

⃝ oedematous extremities

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---

## Page 10

Page 10 of 10
Original Research

15. A haematoma can be prevented by:

18. Samples should be transported in a sealed packet with one 

specimen per packet.

⃝ Applying pressure to the puncture site

⃝ True

⃝ Forcefully drawing back the plunger of the syringe until the 

blood starts frothing

⃝ False

⃝ Removing the needle before removing the tourniquet

19. Blood samples should be kept out of direct sunlight.

16. Which of the following results in blood sample rejection?

⃝ True

⃝ Haemolysis

⃝ False

⃝ No facility name on request form

⃝ Cracked sample tube

20. Look at the blood sample and request form.
Would this sample be accepted or rejected by the laboratory?

⃝ Some of the above

⃝ Accepted

⃝ All of the above

17. Haemolysis can be prevented by the use of a Luer adaptor 
attached to a butterfly needle.

⃝ True

⃝ Rejected
[A completed request form and an expired sample tube will be 
provided, the correct answer to the question above will be: 
rejected as a result of an expired tube]
The staff are expected to know that they need to check the expiry 
date on the tube.

⃝ False

http://www.phcfm.org
Open Access


---
