
## Page 1

Original Article

Anxiety Treatment of Opioid Dependent Patients 
with Buprenorphine: A Randomized, Double‑blind, 
Clinical Trial

Jamshid Ahmadi, Mina Sefidfard Jahromi

ABSTRACT

Objective: The objective of this study is to examine the impact of vary doses of buprenorphine on anxiety symptoms in 
opioid‑dependent inpatients over a 7 days period, using a randomized controlled trial design. Design: Patients were 
randomized to three groups. Patients and Methods: Fourteen men who met the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition criteria for both opioid use disorder and generalized anxiety disorder and were seeking 
for treatment. Intervention: Patients obtain dosages of 32 mg or 64 mg or 96 mg of buprenorphine as a single dose only 
and were treated in a psychiatric inpatient unit. Of 14 subjects; 5 (35.7%) obtained 32 mg, 4 (28.6%) obtained 64 mg, 
and 5 (35.7%) obtained 96 mg of buprenorphine. Measurements: Administering daily Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale and 
interview. Results: All the patients ended the 7‑day treatment time. The results showed a significant reduction in anxiety 
symptoms within each of the three groups (P = 0.00), but no difference in outcome between the groups (P = 0.605). 
Conclusions: The outcome suggests a single high dose of buprenorphine can supply a speedy, safe, simple, and suitable 
means of anxiety treatment. The single high dose of buprenorphine could be a novel mechanism medication that provides 
a rapid and sustained improvement for generalized anxiety disorder in opioid dependent patients. Placebo‑controlled 
trials of longer duration are needed to evaluate ability, safety, and psychological and physiological influence of extended 
exposure to this medication.

Key words: Anxiety, buprenorphine, opioid‑dependent

INTRODUCTION

Some studies disclosed that success in the detoxification 
therapy of patients with opioid dependence could be 
prognosticated by primary psychiatric symptoms.[9] 
Coexisting of mental problems principally depression 

A significant number of studies and clinical trials 
reveal that patients with substance use disorders have 
high rates of anxiety and depression,[1‑4] personality 
disorders,[5,6] and also minor psychopathology.[7,8]

Access this article online

Quick Response Code

Website:

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 3.0 
License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the 
work non‑commercially, as long as the author is credited and the 
new creations are licensed under the identical terms.

www.ijpm.info

For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com

DOI:

10.4103/0253-7176.211765

*[Image]*

How to cite this article: Ahmadi J, Jahromi MS. Anxiety treatment of opioid 
dependent patients with buprenorphine: A randomized, double-blind, clinical 
trial. Indian J Psychol Med 2017;39:445-9.

Substance Abuse Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran

Address for correspondence: Prof. Jamshid Ahmadi 
Substance Abuse Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. E‑mail: jamshid_ahmadi@yahoo.com

© 2017 Indian Psychiatric Society | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow	
445


---

## Page 2

Ahmadi and Jahromi: Anxiety treatment of opioid dependence with buprenorphine

of anxiety symptoms in opioid dependents). Hence, 
our report may display a new finding.

and anxiety can interfere with the course and prognosis 
of substance use disorders. Studies illuminate that 
opioid‑dependent patients associated with anxiety or 
depression in the beginning of treatment might have 
reduced the chance to be in remission and have clean 
urines at follow‑up than opioid dependents with a 
normal mood.[10]

The essential goal of the current pilot study was 
to test the impact of vary single high doses of 
buprenorphine (32, 64, and 96 mg buprenorphine) for 
the treatment of anxiety symptoms in opioid‑dependent 
population.

Buprenorphine, ketamine, or ayahuasca can reduce the 
level of depression or anxiety.[10‑20]

PATIENTS AND METHODS

An Amazonian botanical hallucinogenic 
substance ‑ Ayahuasca ‑ includes dimethyltryptamine, 
which is an agonist of 5‑HT2A receptor, and also 
harmine, which is a monoamine‑oxidase A inhibitor. 
Ayahuasca lower the severity of depression and anxiety. 
A single dose of ayahuasca lessens the level of depression 
and anxiety very promptly.[11,12]

Likewise, buprenorphine medication can reduce the 
level of anxiety and depression straightaway.[13,14]

Buprenorphine medication which is a partial agonist 
of µ‑opioid receptors has a high affinity for these 
receptors. Likewise, it binds more firmly to these 
receptors than full opioid agonists. Buprenorphine has 
pharmacological properties that are more features of an 
antagonist. Hence, can have considerable denotation for 
clinical practice. Buprenorphine has the dual influence 
of causing opioid reactions while obstructing the effects 
of extra opioid use. It is usually administered for the 
management of pain and opioid withdrawal symptoms.

Subjects
All patients admitted consecutively to an inpatient 
psychiatric hospital in Shiraz city during 2016 entered 
the study. Fourteen unpaid male patients were enrolled 
in the study. Only males were selected for the study 
because the rate of opioid abuse is thought to be 
negligible among females. Shiraz is the Capital City of 
Fars Province with a population of over 1.5 million, in 
the South Iran. At screening, patients were examined 
by a physician to establish eligibility. Before each 
interview, we explained the aims of the research study, 
guaranteed confidentiality, and obtained informed 
consent. The interviews and examinations were done on 
the premises of the treatment hospital because it seemed 
a nonthreatening and suitable setting. Family members, 
relatives, or friends accompanied most patients to 
the hospital; this attendance provided a condition to 
confirm some of the data obtained from the patients. 
They had to meet the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM‑5) criteria 
for both opioid use disorder and generalized anxiety 
disorder. Daily use of an opioid for at least 1 year was 
a requisite. Patients were kept out from the trial if 
they had a substance use disorder other than opioid. 
Patients who were not interested in participation at the 
beginning of the study were excluded.

Buprenorphine (as a single dose only) was administered 
gradually when the opioid use disorder patients were 
moderately in withdrawal from opioids.

Although some investigations indicated a reduction 
of depression, however, buprenorphine is not Food 
and Drug Administration approved nor planned, to 
manage depression. Clinical trials required to test its 
effects have not been conducted yet. Buprenorphine 
should be considered as possibly addicting itself. Thus, 
it should not be usually used for this aim. Significant 
investigations and also clinical trials are needed to 
recognize this field. We are now optimistic that research 
workers will open the basis for treatment of depression 
and anxiety in opioid dependents.[13,15]

Buprenorphine is regarded to treat opioids withdrawals 
and pain.[16]

Procedure
The current research was a three group, randomized, 
double‑blind study. Both investigators and patients 
were blind to the study. Subjects were randomized to 
treatment groups in consecutive numerical order by 
the investigational team  (patients could not decide, 
to which group to be enrolled). The research team 
included addiction psychiatrist, general physician, and 
psychologist.

We are now using a single dose of sublingual 
buprenorphine only as a new approach for the treatment 
of anxiety symptoms because we consider and theorize 
that (our rationale) the biochemistry in anxiety is more 
or less similar to opioid dependence.[16‑20]

We could not find published controlled findings on this 
issue (single high dose buprenorphine for the therapy 

The Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM‑A) was used 
to rate the level of anxiety in opioid‑dependent men, 
having generalized anxiety disorder as well.

446	
Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine | Volume 39 | Issue 4 | July-August 2017


---

## Page 3

Ahmadi and Jahromi: Anxiety treatment of opioid dependence with buprenorphine

The HAM‑A was applied to the inpatients before 
beginning of opioid withdrawal symptoms.

Table  1 demonstrates demographic features of the 
patients. As we note, there are not any significant 
differences in their demographic features.

Randomization to research study was carried out 
by appointing the patients to the medication. 
Patients were enrolled onto 32  mg or 64  mg or 
96 mg of buprenorphine as a single dose only. Out 
of 14 patients; 5 (35.7%) received 32 mg, 4 (28.6%) 
received 64  mg, and 5  (35.7%) received 96  mg of 
buprenorphine.

Table 2 represents anxiety scores of the groups during 
7 days of treatment time. As we look in 32‑mg group, 
we note that there are significant statistical differences 
in anxiety scores between day 1 and day 7 (P = 0.001). 
Similarly, there are significant differences in anxiety 
scores between day 1 and day 7 both in 64‑mg 
group (P = 0.000) and 96‑mg group (P = 0.00).

Subjects were studied for 7  days. Outcome was 
calculated by daily measurement of anxiety score based 
on the HAM‑A, and interview.

Comparing the mean anxiety scores in three groups, we 
cannot see any significant differences.

Figure 1 portrays the anxiety scores from day 1 to day 
7 in all groups.

DISCUSSION

The results showed a significant reduction in anxiety 
symptoms within each of the three groups (P = 0.00), 

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses included both descriptive statistics 
and inference statistical procedures. Data analysis 
was done using SPSS version 18 for windows (USA). 
Chi‑square analyses were used to test for differences 
in frequencies, and ANOVA or t‑test analyses were 
used to test for differences in means among the three 
groups. These were two‑sided with significance set at 
P < 0.05.

RESULTS

All the 14 inpatients completed the 7‑day period study. 
Hence, the data were gathered from 14 male opioid 
dependents whose mean age was 31.87 ± 8.15 year; 
with age range of 17–48 years.

Out of 14  patients; 5  (35.7%) obtained 32  mg, 
4 (28.6%) obtained 64 mg and also 5 (35.7%) obtained 
96 mg of buprenorphine.

*[Image]*

Figure 1: Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale

Regarding marital status, age, education, and 
employment, we could not find any statistically 
significant differences in groups.

Table 1: Demographic characteristics of 14 subjects

32 mg
64 mg
96 mg
Total
χ2
P

Age
32.80±12.39
32.00±6.73
30.80±5.06
31.87±8.15
0.122
0.941
Duration of drug abuse (year)
10.90±10.99
9.50±3.78
8.20±2.16
9.53±6.58
0.512
0.774
Job

Unemployed
1 (20)
2 (50)
1 (20)
4 (28.6)
1.633
0.803
Self‑employed
3. (60)
1 (25)
3 (60)
7 (50)
Employed
1 (20)
1 (25)
1 (20)
3 (21)
Education

Illiterate
1 (20)
1 (1)
0
1 (7.1)
5.125
0.528
Primary school
1 (20)
1 (25)
0
2 (14.3)
High school
1 (20)
2 (50)
4 (80)
7 (50)
Higher education
2 (40)
1 (25)
1 (20)
4 (28.6)
Marital status

Single
4 (80)
1 (25)
3 (60)
8 (57.1)
2.771
0.250
Married
1 (20)
3 (75)
2 (40)
6 (42.9)

Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine | Volume 39 | Issue 4 | July-August 2017	
447


---

## Page 4

Ahmadi and Jahromi: Anxiety treatment of opioid dependence with buprenorphine

Table 2: Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale

Day
Group
χ2
P
32 mg
64 mg
96 mg

of Medical Sciences No. IR.SUMS.REC.1395.102, and 
was granted by Vice Chancellery for Research, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

Baseline
11.00±8.63
26.50±14.70
23.80±13.82
3.58
0.187
Day 1
6.20±10.15
6.75±9.63
10.80±9.31
1.17
0.556
Day 2
4.00±7.38
2.50±5.00
8.40±13.88
0.382
0.826
Day 3
3.00±6.70
2.50±5.00
0.00±0.00
1.20
0.548
Day 4
2.40±5.36
1.25±2.50
0.00±0.00
1.20
0.548
Day 5
2.40±5.36
1.25±2.50
0.00±0.00
1.20
0.548
Day 6
2.00±4.47
1.25±2.50
0.00±0.00
1.20
0.548
Day 7
1.00±2.23
1.25±2.50
0.00±0.00
1.24
0.536
F
5.107
9.193
7.024
df
7
7
7
P
0.001
0.000
0.00
Power
0.987
1.00
0.999
Total of 7 days
4.00±6.00
5.40±4.36
5.37±3.51
1.00
0.605

but no difference in outcome between the groups 
(P = 0.605).

The current clinical study displayed that a single high 
dose buprenorphine appears to be significantly efficient, 
safe and helpful. This trial suggests that buprenorphine 
can supply a simple, speedy, safe, and suitable means 
of treatment of anxiety. Giving buprenorphine 
medication as single high dose looks to lower concerns 
of compliance, in addition to decreasing the possibility 
of buprenorphine being diverted for dependency and 
abuse. Likewise, the cost benefits appear to be favorable, 
primarily while considering the chance of using for 
outpatients without a necessity for admission to a 
hospital. Still, the findings of this research require to 
be repeated in a larger sample with a control group 
receiving a conventional mode of treatment and in an 
outpatient center.

1.	
Karp  JF, Butters  MA, Begley  AE, Miller  MD, Lenze  EJ, 
Blumberger  DM, et  al. Safety, tolerability, and clinical 
effect of low‑dose buprenorphine for treatment‑resistant 
depression in midlife and older adults. J Clin Psychiatry 
2014;75:e785‑93.
2.	
Dorus W, Senay EC. Depression, demographic dimensions, 
and drug abuse. Am J Psychiatry 1980;137:699‑704.
3.	
Ross  HE, Glaser  FB, Germanson  T. The prevalence of 
psychiatric disorders in patients with alcohol and other 
drug problems. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1988;45:1023‑31.
4.	
Rounsaville  BJ, Weissman  MM, Kleber  H, Wilber  C. 
Heterogeneity of psychiatric diagnosis in treated opiate 
addicts. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1982;39:161‑8.
5.	
DeJong  CA, van den Brink  W, Har teveld  FM, 
van der Wielen EG. Personality disorders in alcoholics and 
drug addicts. Compr Psychiatry 1993;34:87‑94.
6.	
Nace  EP, Davis  CW, Gaspari  JP. Axis II comorbidity in 
substance abusers. Am J Psychiatry 1991;148:118‑20.
7.	
Darke S, Wodak A, Hall W, Heather N, Ward J. Prevalence 
and predictors of psychopathology among opioid users. Br 
J Addict 1992;87:771‑6.
8.	
Swift W, Williams G, Neill O, Grenyer B. The prevalence of 
minor psychopathology in opioid users seeking treatment. 
Br J Addict 1990;85:629‑34.
9.	
Kosten TR, Rounsaville BJ, Kleber HD. DSM‑III personality 
disorders in opiate addicts. Compr Psychiatry 1982;23:572‑81.
10.	 Rounsaville BJ, Kosten T, Kleber H. Success and failure at 

CONCLUSIONS

outpatient opioid detoxification. Evaluating the process 
of clonidine‑ and methadone‑assisted withdrawal. J Nerv 
Ment Dis 1985;173:103‑10.
11.	 Osório Fde  L, Sanches  RF, Macedo  LR, Santos  RG, 

The results illustrated a significant reduction in anxiety 
symptoms within each of the three groups, but no 
difference in outcome between the groups.

Maia‑de‑Oliveira JP, Wichert‑Ana L, et al. Antidepressant 
effects of a single dose of ayahuasca in patients with 
recurrent depression: A preliminary report. Rev Bras 
Psiquiatr 2015;37:13‑20.
12.	 Sanches RF, de Lima Osório F, Dos Santos RG, Macedo LR, 

Maia‑de‑Oliveira JP, Wichert‑Ana L, et al. Antidepressant 
Effects of a Single Dose of Ayahuasca in patients with 
recurrent depression: A SPECT study. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
2016;36:77‑81.
13.	 Ahmadi J. Fast treatment of methamphetamine related 

anxiety and depressive disorders: A novel approach. J Addict 
Med Ther Sci 2016;1:44‑6. [Doi: 10.17352/2455‑3484.000011].
14.	 Ahmadi J. Instant detoxification of heroin with high dose 

of buprenorphine. J Addict Prev 2016;4:3.
15.	 Gracer  R. The Buprenorphine Effect on Depression. 

Our findings documented that giving a single high dose 
of buprenorphine might provide a simple, speedy, safe, 
and suitable means of anxiety reduction. A single dose of 
buprenorphine could be a new mechanism medication 
that provides a rapid and sustained improvement 
for anxiety symptoms in opioid‑dependent patients. 
Placebo‑controlled clinical trials of longer duration 
are required to test efficacy, safety, and psychological 
and physiological effect of extended exposure to this 
medication.

The National Alliance of Advocates for Buprenorphine 
Treatment (NAABT); February, 2007 Newsletter.
16.	 Sadock B, Sadock V, Ruiz P, editors. Kaplan and Sadock’s 

Synopsis of Psychiatry. Philadelphia, USA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2015.

Acknowledgment
This research proposal was approved on August 21, 
2016, by Ethic Research Committee of Shiraz University 

448	
Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine | Volume 39 | Issue 4 | July-August 2017


---

## Page 5

Ahmadi and Jahromi: Anxiety treatment of opioid dependence with buprenorphine

17.	 Gerra G, Leonardi C, D’Amore A, Strepparola G, Fagetti R, 

19.	 Maremmani AG, Rovai L, Pani PP, Pacini M, Lamanna F, 

Assi C, et al. Buprenorphine treatment outcome in dually 
diagnosed heroin dependent patients: A retrospective study. 
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2006;30:265‑72.
18.	 Ipser JC, Terburg D, Syal S, Phillips N, Solms M, Panksepp J, 

Rugani F, et al. Do methadone and buprenorphine have the 
same impact on psychopathological symptoms of heroin 
addicts? Ann Gen Psychiatry 2011;10:17.
20.	 Falcon E, Maier K, Robinson SA, Hill‑Smith TE, Lucki I. Effects 

et al. Reduced fear‑recognition sensitivity following acute 
buprenorphine administration in healthy volunteers. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2013;38:166‑70.

of buprenorphine on behavioral tests for antidepressant 
and anxiolytic drugs in mice. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
2015;232:907‑15.

New features on the journal’s website

Optimized content for mobile and hand-held devices

HTML pages have been optimized of mobile and other hand-held devices (such as iPad, Kindle, iPod) for faster browsing speed.
Click on [Mobile Full text] from Table of Contents page.
This is simple HTML version for faster download on mobiles (if viewed on desktop, it will be automatically redirected to full HTML version)

E-Pub for hand-held devices 

EPUB is an open e-book standard recommended by The International Digital Publishing Forum which is designed for reflowable content i.e. the 
text display can be optimized for a particular display device.
Click on [EPub] from Table of Contents page.
There are various e-Pub readers such as for Windows: Digital Editions, OS X: Calibre/Bookworm, iPhone/iPod Touch/iPad: Stanza, and Linux: 
Calibre/Bookworm.

E-Book for desktop

*[Image]*

One can also see the entire issue as printed here in a ‘flip book’ version on desktops.
Links are available from Current Issue as well as Archives pages. 
Click on

 View as eBook

Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine | Volume 39 | Issue 4 | July-August 2017	
449


---
